A Modular Quantum Network Architecture for Integrating Network
Scheduling with Local Program Execution.
Thomas R. Beauchamp1,2,3 , Hana Jirovská1,2,3 , Scarlett Gauthier1,2,3 , and Stephanie Wehner1,2,3
1

QuTech, Delft University of Technology
Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Delft University of Technology
3
Quantum Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer Science, Delft University of Technology
2

tangled links [14]. Therefore, there exist two interacting
scheduling problems which must be solved: firstly how
should the limited network resources be assigned to pairs
of users to allow them to generate entangled links (the
network scheduling problem), and secondly how to efficiently schedule the execution of quantum applications to
efficiently use any entangled links which are generated (the
local scheduling problem).
The first operating system for end nodes, QNodeOS [15],
allows the second of these problems to be solved. Qoala
[16], an application execution environment which runs on
QNodeOS, offers an improved end node execution environment. QNodeOS breaks an application into a program
at each node, which is then further subdivided into blocks
of instructions that can be scheduled for execution at runtime. Furthermore, Qoala enables a compiler which can
provide advice about the quantity and quality of entangled
links which are required. Although this application execution environment successfully address the local scheduling
problem, they require the existence of a network schedule
to supply allocations of time during which entanglement
generation can take place.
However, there presently does not exist a network architecture which can produce schedules which are compatible with such an execution environment. Without such an
architecture, the network scheduling problem cannot be
solved in a manner which still allows the local scheduling
problem to be solved effectively. In this work we therefore
propose such an architecture to unify the approach to the
network and local scheduling problems. In particular:

arXiv:2503.12582v1 [quant-ph] 16 Mar 2025

Abstract
We propose an architecture for scheduling network operations enabling the end-to-end generation of entanglement
according to user demand. The main challenge solved by
this architecture is to allow for the integration of a network
schedule with the execution of quantum programs running
on processing end nodes in order to realise quantum network applications. A key element of this architecture is the
definition of an entanglement packet to meet application
requirements on near-term quantum networks where the
lifetimes of the qubits stored at the end nodes are limited.
Our architecture is fully modular and hardware agnostic,
and defines a framework for further research on specific
components that can now be developed independently of
each other. In order to evaluate our architecture, we realise a proof of concept implementation on a simulated 6node network in a star topology. We show our architecture
facilitates the execution of quantum network applications,
and that robust admission control is required to maintain
quality of service. Finally, we comment on potential bottlenecks in our architecture and provide suggestions for
future improvements.

I.

Introduction

The realisation of a quantum internet will enable the use of
new networked applications beyond what is possible with
the current classical internet. Such applications include
the ability to perform verifiably secure secret sharing [1,2],
secure remote computation [3–5] and securely electing a
leader [6], amongst many others [7]. The aim of any quantum network architecture therefore should be to ensure
that these applications can be successfully executed.
To execute a quantum application, so-called entangled
links between the end nodes, the quantum devices the
users have access to, are required. Each of these entangled links is a pair of entangled qubits with a fidelity with
respect to an EPR pair [8], where the fidelity is a measure of the quality of the entangled link [9]. However,
such links are difficult to produce and doing so requires
the use of a limited quantity of resources in the quantum
network [10–13]. Furthermore, at present each link has a
limited usable lifetime as quantum memories experience
decoherence over time, reducing the quality of stored en-

• We introduce the first quantum network architecture which takes a unified approach to
scheduling the execution of quantum applications on end nodes and scheduling the use of
resources on the network. As part of this we
introduce a notion of packets of entanglement
to capture the requirements on entangled links imposed by applications, and a corresponding notion of
a packet generation task to allow the network to
efficiently schedule time for the generation of these
packets of entanglement. We also define a demand
format which captures all the information required
by the central controller to be able to compute network schedules. This architecture also provides a
modular framework within which further research
1

can be undertaken to develop synergistic network and
local scheduling strategies. This will enable network
schedules to be integrated into local program execution in a well-defined and consistent manner.

there exists a network schedule in order for entanglement
generation to occur. One of the aims of this work is to design an architecture which can produce suitable network
schedules which enable the execution of quantum network
applications using Qoala on QNodeOS.
Our work is also compatible with the network stack proposed in Dahlberg et al. in [21]. In particular, the network
schedules that our architecture produces replace the queue
used in the implementation of [21] in [20].
We build on the formalism presented in [22]. In particular we incorporate the framing of entanglement generation
as a problem in the field of scan statistics (see e.g. [23,24])
into our architecture.
There are several other authors who have proposed architectures for quantum networks, however they each have
a different scope for the architecture than ourselves. In
particular, none of them explicitly consider the influence
of requirements of executing local applications on the network.
For instance, Skrzypczyk et al. in [25] propose an architecture around using TDMA schedules to generate good
quality entanglement. Whilst we build on their ideas
about scheduling, they do not consider how their scheduling will impact the ability of end nodes in the network to
execute the applications requiring this entanglement, nor
how the demands are generated from the applications.
Cicconetti et al. in [26] and Gu et al. in [18] consider
the problem of scheduling requests for entanglement generation in a quantum network. However in both cases
they consider a continuous distribution network rather
than a generate-when-requested network. Furthermore,
they do not consider how the end nodes use the entanglement which is generated, and also consider a system where
every edge in the network is in constant communication
with the central controller, whereas we only require sporadic communications. A disadvantage of this compared
to our approach is that due to latency when communicating between the edges and the central controller, there is
an inherent loss in the quality of entangled links which
can be created. Furthermore, they only consider requests
for single entangled links, whereas we consider requests for
packets of entangled links.
Van Meter et al. in [27] propose an architecture which
focuses on routing of entanglement across many smaller
networks, and the protocols required to do so. This again
does not account for the local nodes, nor does it consider
the interaction of scheduling entanglement generation on
the network with executing the applications on end nodes.
Furthermore, the scope of our work is to provide an architecture for a single quantum network which can be centrally controlled, rather than for a quantum internetwork.
Our architecture also has similarities to a softwaredefined network [28–30]. In particular, we see our work
as a method of facilitating the implementation of a quantum SDN. There have been several examples of prior work
on defining a quantum SDN. For example in [31], Kozlowski, Kuipers and Wehner give an implementation of
a quantum SDN using the P4 language. However, this
implementation only focuses on the network aspects, and

• We provide an example implementation of our
architecture in simulation, using earliest deadline
first derived methods for network scheduling. We use
this implementation to perform numerical simulations
of our architecture and create a baseline performance
evaluation against which to benchmark further work
in the domain of quantum network scheduling. The
code used for this implementation and the data used
in the evaluation is available from [17].
I.i.

Structure

The rest of this paper is structured as follows: In II we
give some background and related work and discuss how
our work here differs. In III we discuss some of the design
considerations which inform the design of our architecture.
In IV we lay out our proposed network architecture. In V
we give an example of an implementation of the architecture. Finally in VI we evaluate the performance of our
architecture using a specific implementation, and in VII
we comment on future directions for research. A table
summarising all the notation we use in this paper can be
found in Appendix B.

II.
II.i.

Background

Network Model

There are many different models for how a quantum network should operate. In the literature, one common example is what we will call a pre-loaded network, where there
is a high probability that entangled links are immediately
available to an application (e.g. [18, 19]). Such networks
rely on continuously generating and buffering entanglement between each pair of network components. However,
restrictions on achievable entanglement generation rates,
buffer lifetimes and buffer capacities limit the possibility
of near-term implementations of such networks. For example, experiments on leading hardware [20] have realised a
three-node network, on which they reported memory lifetimes of 11ms and generation rates of one end-to-end link
every 40s. Therefore, we instead consider a generate-whenrequested network. In such networks, we do not assume
that end-to-end entangled links can be stored between any
two scheduled periods of time. This type of network is
implementable with the technological maturity of current
devices and those that will exist in the coming years.
II.ii.

Related Work

Our architecture is designed to be compatible with the
network application execution environment Qoala, which
is described in [16]. Qoala is an extension to the QNodeOS
operating system for quantum network end nodes developed by Delle Donne et al. in [15]. When using the Qoala
execution environment on QNodeOS, it is assumed that
2

does not consider the execution of applications on the end
nodes. There has also been a quantum SDN proposed and
demonstrated by Yang and Cui in [32]. However again
this work does not explicitly consider scheduling at the
end nodes in the network, and they focus on demands
being registered via a web-interface. In contrast we create a fully-autonomous architecture, where the end nodes,
rather than the users themselves, submit the demands in
response to users wishing to run specific applications.
There have also been several SDN architectures proposed for quantum key distribution (QKD), e.g. [33–42].
However, our architecture can support arbitrary applications, rather than just QKD. This imposes more constraints on the process of generating entanglement than
are considered in these works. For the same reason we
cannot use the demand format in [43]. Furthermore, we
are focused on the execution of these applications rather
than adding extra security to a classical network as in [33].
Our architecture also has similarities to a so-called
Time-triggered Ethernet (TTEthernet) architecture [44].
However, for our problem one cannot just use a classical TTEthernet system for a couple of reasons. Firstly,
as a classical system the literature does not directly take
into account quantum-specific constraints such as decoherence. Secondly, the predominant usages of TTEthernet
in the classical sphere are in control systems, such as in
spacecraft [45, 46]. where the sources of (time triggered)
demands on the network are known a priori and can therefore be accounted for. However, in our model the network
does not know where demands will come from, what resources or objectives they will require, or for how long they
will need to use the network.

End nodes may be connected to a second type of device,
metropolitan hubs. These are devices which enable pairs
of nodes located close together (typically <50km end-toend) to create entangled links. Examples of such devices
are entanglement distribution switches [57–59], which employ quantum memories at the hub, or alternatively entanglement generation switches [60, 61], which do not rely
on quantum memories at the hub. A metropolitan hub
will typically have many devices connected to it, including both end nodes and repeater chains.
The third type of component we include are repeater
chains, which allow for long distance entangled links to be
created between two parties. Repeater chains are made
from a linear chain of repeater nodes, such as those in
[13, 62–65]. We treat repeater chains as a single network
component which can be configured to produce links between two border nodes connected to either end of the
repeater chain at a fixed rate and average fidelity.
The final component we consider in the network are
junction nodes. These provide an interface between multiple repeater chains and between repeater chains and a
metropolitan hub. In the latter case, junction nodes are
also referred to as border nodes [66]. Such nodes remove
the requirement to have direct repeater chains between
every pair of metropolitan hubs. Junction nodes may be
implemented using a combination of one or more of the
previous devices.
We refer to repeater chains, metropolitan hubs and junction nodes collectively as internal components, and end
nodes as external components.
We assume that each internal component of the network
has a control API which can be used to install network
schedules. Furthermore, such an API is able to expose
information about the operational parameters of the comIII. Design Considerations
ponent. For example, a metropolitan hub may expose the
Our network architecture defines a framework for integra- maximum number of pairs of node it is possible to simultation of a network schedule with the execution of quantum neously connect; a repeater chain may expose the rate and
programs running on end nodes. The design of the archi- fidelity at which entangled links between the end points
tecture thus inherits considerations pertaining to robust are created; and junction nodes may expose the number
operation of a quantum network (see e.g. [21]) and con- of links which can be stored and for how long.
siderations from the application execution environment of
end nodes [16]. We describe at a high level each of the III.i.b. Hardware Agnosticism
relevant principles and highlight how they may be consisEach of the multiple possible implementations of any nettently combined into the foundational pillars of a single
work device is associated with specific requirements renetwork architecture.
lating to its operation. However, a network architecture
should be able to seamlessly support whatever hardware
III.i. Network
is being used. As a result, where necessary we assume
that the control API of internal network components and
III.i.a. Devices and Components
the application execution environment of end nodes make
We consider a quantum network comprised of four types concessions for the specific requirements of a device, enof devices. Figure 1 illustrates an example of how these suring correct functioning. Thus our network architecture
components can fit together. The first device type, called is hardware agnostic and compatible with a heterogeneous
end nodes, execute quantum applications, operate under network consisting of devices based on a variety of differindependent (local) control, and accept input from users. ent hardware types.
An end node may be a processing node with some memory
capabilities, such as in [47–54], or a device which is capable III.i.c. SDN Controller
of preparing/measuring single photons, such as in [55, 56].
Any end node can also perform classical operations, such Software defined networks (SDN)s [28–30] separate the
as arithmetic operations and classical communication.
data plane of a network, which forwards traffic to the
3

F

J3
A

E
M1

B

J1

J2

J4

C

M2
D

..
.
Figure 1: A general quantum network may be built from four kinds of devices: end nodes, metropolitan hubs, repeater
chains, and junction nodes (see III.i.a). These devices may be connected in the manner illustrated. Circles A-G
represent user controlled end nodes, squares Mi are metropolitan hubs and diamonds Ji are junction nodes. Repeater
chains are represented by zig-zag lines, while individual quantum repeater nodes are represented by triangles.
appropriate destinations, from the control plane, which
makes decisions about how traffic should be handled. Decisions taken by the control plane include routing and resource access management. The SDN framework aims to
simplify network management and make networks flexible and cost-effective. We consider the traffic on the data
plane of a quantum network to consist of point to point
attempts to generate entanglement.
We assume that the quantum network follows the general architecture of an SDN. In particular, we assume that
the network is overseen by a (logically) central controller,
similar to for example [11,25,31,34]. Such a controller has
the authority to compute and enforce network schedules,
which dictate when entangled links can be generated for
particular pairs of end nodes.
We also assume that the central controller has a complete overview of the entanglement generation capabilities
of the components of the network (consideration III.i.g).
However, we do not assume it knows whether or not any
given attempt to generate an entangled link succeeds or
fails.
III.i.d.

A

B

Figure 2: Example of an entanglement generation protocol
(heralded entanglement). Nodes A and B probabilistically
send photons to a ‘heralding station’ located midway between them. This heralding station consists of (single)
photon detectors and a beamsplitter. Depending on the
pattern of photons detected, it is possible to determine if
an elementary entangled link has been generated, and to
subsequently inform the nodes. More details can be found
in, e.g. [13].

III.i.e.

Protocols for generating entanglement

Our architecture is agnostic to how entangled links are
produced at the physical layer. However, we assume that
any protocol which is used allows the rate and fidelity at
which entangled links can be produced to be calculated
and exposed. We also assume that entangled links between neighbouring nodes are created using a heralded
entanglement generation scheme such as [13, 62] (Figure
2). In particular this means that the nodes attempting to
create an entangled link receive a success or failure outcome, indicating when an entangled link has been created.
Hence subsequent attempts may be triggered conditioned
on the success or failure of previous attempts.
We refer to entangled links between end-nodes as endto-end entangled links, and entangled links between neighbouring nodes as elementary entangled links.
Note that in the literature an entanglement generation
attempt typically refers to an attempt to generate an elementary entangled link, following some specified entanglement generation protocol, for example as in Figure 2.
However, when referring to entanglement generation attempts we will mean attempts to generate end-to-end entangled links, requiring the use of all internal components
along a specified path and employing a pre-determined
protocol. For example, attempts to generate entanglement

Device Autonomy

We assume that each component of the network is able
to operate without direct interaction with the central controller. In particular, we assume for each component in
the network there is a local controller which handles executing an installed network schedule on that component
without further input from the central controller. On end
nodes, this local controller takes the form of an execution
environment such as Qoala [16] running on QNodeOS [15].
On internal components, this local controller may be more
limited and simply implement a rule-set which realises the
network schedule. For example, if a repeater chain is required by the network schedule to produce entangled links
with certain rate/fidelity characteristics, then we assume
there exists a logically centralised local controller which
implements some policy, e.g. [12,67], on the repeater chain
in order to create the required entangled links.
4

between nodes A and D in Figure 1, require the simultaneous use of resources at M1 , J1 , J2 , J4 and M2 , as well
as the repeater chains connecting these components.
III.i.f.

a central controller to a node 10 km away may take from
50 µs to several ms. This variability in process duration
can be due a variety of sources. Typical examples include
that a single process may comprise a large number of computational (low level) operations, that there may be traffic from other processes–creating competition and leading
to waiting times for limited computational resources or
network bandwidth, or inter-process interactions that necessitate waiting for responses from inter-dependent processes [73–75].
To accommodate this variability, our network architecture uses a modular framework, computing and distributing schedules to nodes in advance.
An additional type of timing consideration is that entanglement generation involves sequential non-overlapping attempts, each with a particular sequence of operations, setting a minimum period and maximum rate for the process.
This also means operations cannot change mid-attempt
without disrupting entanglement generation.

Network Stack

A network stack is a layered set of protocols and services that work together to enable network communication. Each layer in the stack is responsible for a specific aspect of network functionality. Together the layers provide
a comprehensive framework for data transmission across
classical networks [68] or delivery of end-to-end entangled
links by quantum networks [21].
We assume that the underlying network stack is as proposed in [21]. In particular, we assume that the link
layer is implemented using the protocol in [20]. This protocol assumes the existence of a time-division multipleaccess (TDMA) schedule computed by an external scheduler which determines when entanglement generation can
take place.
Our architecture facilitates the construction of such
schedules. We define a periodic timeline for computation
and distribution of network schedules to network components. A network schedule is a time ordered plan for the
execution of finite duration network tasks. We provide
a precise system for translating the demands for service
originated by applications running on end nodes into the
task executions that make up a schedule. The translation
process takes into account the capabilities of the various
network components, learned through a capability update
process between components and the central controller.
III.i.g.

III.ii.

For simplicity, we assume quantum network applications
are executed between two end nodes. However, our architecture is directly compatible with applications involving
multiple end nodes.
III.ii.a.

Execution Environment

To execute applications, end nodes require a runtime execution environment. In this work we assume the Qoala [16]
runtime environment is employed, running on QNodeOS
[15] which has many useful features. Qoala breaks applications down into a program running on each end node.
Each of these programs is then broken down further into
blocks of instructions, which can be one of four types: classical local (CL), classical communication (CC), quantum
local (QL) or quantum communication (QC). Quantum
communication blocks correspond to generating entangled
links.
When an application is executed, each block of instructions causes a task to be created, which is then scheduled
for execution by a local scheduler on that end node. The
execution of the task corresponds to realising the block
of instructions. Task execution scheduling can either be
performed in advance or at runtime.
The Qoala environment comes equipped with a compiler
which runs locally on each node. This compiler provides
advice about how local hardware parameters (e.g. memory
lifetimes) are mapped to requirements on any entangled
links produced. The compiler also produces metadata for
every block and for an entire program. This metadata covers any constraints on the execution of tasks corresponding
to the constituent blocks of a program. This metadata
is used in a process called capability negotiation during
which the nodes ensure that the execution of the various
programs comprising the application is compatible.
Whilst here we assume use of the Qoala environment,
our architecture is compatible with any runtime environment with an equivalent notion of task scheduling and a

Network Capabilities

The network provides information about its capabilities
to the end nodes as a list of pairs (rate, fidelity)i,j ,
describing the rate and fidelity respectively at which entangled links can be generated between a pair of end nodes
i and j. These pairs can also be endowed with extra information about, for example, the expected jitter and the
availability of each option. We assume that the SDN controller for the network is able to compute these properties
from its knowledge about the capabilities of each individual component.
III.i.h.

Applications

Timing

The time required for network elements to complete actions can only be estimated with finite precision. At the
physical layer, actions have precisely characterised durations, allowing for accurate synchronisation between multiple nodes, with timing precision ranging from tens of
picoseconds (ps) to microseconds (µs), depending on the
operations [48, 69]. Precise timing of a sequence of operations is crucial for processes like entanglement generation [49, 50, 53, 54, 70–72].
In contrast, at higher layers of the network stack, actions have variable durations and latencies, limiting feasible timing precision to µs or milliseconds (ms). For example, transmitting a network schedule over the internet from
5

compiler that provides equivalent metadata.
III.ii.b.

capability negotiation, where the end nodes learn information about each other and the network in order to construct a unified demand; demand submission, where end
nodes submit their demands to the central controller; and
finally network scheduling and schedule distribution, where
the central controller computes the network schedule before distributing it to the end nodes. The stages of the
architecture are summarised in Figure 3.
Our architecture introduces several unique features
which ensure compatibility of the architecture with end
nodes and program execution. Firstly, we periodically
distribute network schedules to end nodes well before the
start time of the network schedule, which allows nodes
enough time to compute local schedules that incorporate
the network schedule. Secondly, we introduce a demand
format which takes into account local processing time requirements. This demand format includes a precise description of the entangled links which are required by an
application, through a notion of a packet of entanglement.
Finally, the format and construction of our network schedules ensure that end nodes are certain about when they
can attempt to generate entanglement, allowing for efficient and effective program execution.
In the rest of this section, we first introduce several preliminaries which precisely define how an application’s requirements translate to a demand for service from end
nodes to the network. Then, we provide a detailed description of each stage of the network architecture.

Application Classes

There are many different quantum network applications,
and each will have different requirements for entangled
links generated by the network. However, they may
be broadly grouped into two different classes, measuredirectly and create-and-keep [21]. In measure-directly
(MD) applications, qubits are measured as soon as entanglement is produced, and no states are kept in memory.
In this case, the demand for the generation of entangled
links is elastic [76]. Examples of MD applications include
quantum key distribution (QKD), which facilitates provably secure secret sharing [1,2], and deterministic teleportation [77, 78].
In create-and-keep (CK) applications, qubits are stored
in memory after entangled links have been generated.
Typically CK applications will require many qubits to be
stored in memory simultaneously. This places limitations
on the spacing between the generation of new links. An
example of a CK application is blind quantum computing (BQC), which facilitates secure remote computation
(e.g. [3–5]).
III.ii.c.

Architecture

Our architecture is agnostic to the architecture of the end
nodes of the network. However, for convenience we assume
that processing nodes have a single monolithic quantum
processing unit (QPU), which is used both for entanglement generation and performing local gates and measurements. Such a QPU is assumed to be only capable of performing a single operation at any given time. This is in line
with state-of-the-art implementations of end nodes [20,49].
We do not make any assumptions about the classical
processing capabilities of the end nodes.
III.ii.d.

IV.i.

The essential task of computing and distributing a network
schedule is executed periodically by the central controller.
Each schedule is associated with a version identifier and
covers an identical execution time known as the scheduling
interval (denoted TSI ). Periodic triggers for computation
and distribution of the schedule are defined with respect
to the TSI . Figure 4 illustrates possible trigger timings
for the components of this periodic task and illustrates
the back-to-back execution of subsequent schedules.
The primary advantage of a periodic approach to
scheduling, as compared to various possible on-line approaches to scheduling, is that it limits the number of updates to the schedule that may be triggered. In particular,
the central controller does not need to update the schedule
every time a new demand is submitted, which reduces the
number of time-consuming interruptions during scheduling. This approach is also advantageous for end nodes,
which receive only finalised network schedules. Consequently, unnecessary interruptions to local schedules and
program execution are avoided. Moreover, any buffer between the time a schedule is received and the time it takes
effect allows end nodes to optimise their local program
schedules without compromising execution of the network
schedule.
Additionally, as compared to on-line network scheduling
with an unbounded number of updates, the periodic distribution of pre-computed network schedules reduces the
number of messages which need to be sent by the central

Knowledge of the network

We assume that an end node has minimal knowledge about
the rest of the network. In particular, we assume that a
priori an end node only knows the capabilities and status
of their own hardware, and the identities of any neighbouring network components and the identity of any control
devices in the network.
Furthermore, we assume that an end node only knows
the programs which are running on itself. In particular, it
is not required that an end node a priori knows the precise
design of the program on the other node in the application.
Additionally, each program should be independent of any
other, and the ability to execute a program should not
require knowledge of the other programs running on the
end node.

IV.

Periodic Computation and Distribution of
Schedules

Network Architecture

Our proposed network architecture is broken up into five
stages, each of which corresponds to a distinct required
process. These stages are: network capability update and
6

Network
Capability
Update (IV.iv)

Capability
Negotiation
(IV.v)

Demand
Submission
(IV.iii, IV.vi)

Network
Scheduling
(IV.ix)

Schedule
Dsitribution
(IV.x)

Figure 3: Flow of information through the stages of the architecture. The processes of ‘Network Capability Update’
and ‘Capability Negotiation’ allow the nodes to gather enough information to be able to submit a unified demand.
These demands are then used to construct a central network schedule, which in turn is used when constructing the
local node schedules.
Demand Registration
Scheduler Admission Control
Compute Schedule
Distribute Schedule
Compute Node Schedule
Execute Schedule
k−1

k

k+1
Scheduling Interval

k+2

Figure 4: Example of the timings for computing, distributing and executing the kth network schedule (in colour and
hatched). In grey and unhatched are the corresponding operations for preceding and subsequent network schedules.
The process of registering received demands is continuous, however we indicate here the time during which if a demand
is submitted, then it will be first considered for scheduler admission as part of computing the kth network schedule.
It is not required that the instances are all identically
executed. For example in an application such as verifiable
blind quantum computing, (e.g. [79]), some instances may
correspond to computation rounds (where the calculation
is performed) and others to test rounds (where the veracity
of the server is checked). However, all instances should use
the same programs on each end node.
Furthermore, we expect that the specified expiry time,
texpiry , will be much longer than any time-scale of the
network. For instance, if the network updates (see §IV.ix)
IV.ii. Application Sessions
on the order of minutes, we expect texpiry to be on the
As the outcome of many quantum applications is proba- order of hours.
bilistic, it is often required to execute the same application
When pairs of nodes send their demands for entanglemany times to extract a useful and reliable output. We re- ment to be generated to the network, they will do so on a
fer to each of these individual executions of an application per-session basis, rather than for each individual instance.
as an application instance.
This reduces the number of demands that the central conIt is also often the case that the nodes will require that troller has to process. Furthermore, it gives the central
all these instances are executed before some time elapses. controller an overview of the scope of a demand, and thereFor example, suppose Alice and Bob wish to communicate fore it can make better decisions regarding whether and
securely within the next two hours. To do so, they may use how to give it service.
QKD to generate a raw key and extract a secret key which
can then be used to communicate. To generate enough raw
key would then require them to execute many instances of IV.ii.a. Executing Application Instances and
Obtaining Minimal Service
the QKD application during the next two hours.
To capture these requirements, we define an application It will be useful to be able to talk about whether program
session.
instances have executed successfully. However, because
Definition IV.1 (Application Session). Suppose end of the imperfect nature of qubits, even if all gates are
nodes N = (node1, node2,...) wish to execute appli- performed perfectly, an ‘incorrect’ outcome may be obtained, which could be interpreted as an unsuccessful excation App at least Ninst times, before time texpiry .
Then we write the corresponding application session as ecution. Therefore, for clarity about what we mean when
we talk about application instances successfully executing,
S = (N , App, Ninst , texpiry )
(1) we make the following series of definitions:
controller, serving to improve the reliability of the network. With this approach to scheduling, all the components of the network know a) when the schedule is changing and b) which schedule version should be in effect when,
reducing the amount of communication required between
the end nodes and the central controller. These features
reduce the likelihood that network components attempt to
execute different versions of the network schedule.

7

Definition IV.2 (Application Instance Execution). We
say an instance of an application is executed when at least
one of the blocks of instructions are performed by the relevant processor.

information. Note that the application session does not
capture all of this information, so we cannot simply use
the application session as the demand submitted to the
network. Furthermore, the network should be agnostic to
the specific application being run and only be aware of the
Definition IV.3 (Successful Quantum Block Execution). desired entangled links to be generated.
We say a block consisting of local gates executed successfully if all included gates were applied to the qubits without destroying them and a signal confirming this is passed IV.iii.a. Packets of Entanglement
back to the local scheduler. We say a quantum communi- We first address specification of the quality and quancation (entanglement generation) block executed success- tity of entanglement required. Recall from §III.ii.b that
fully if a packet of entanglement (see §IV.iii.a) is gener- when executing an application from the create-and-keep
ated, and a signal confirming this is passed to the local class, each instance will require many co-existing entanscheduler.
gled links. Each of these links cannot be too old because quantum memories, which store them, exhibit timeDefinition IV.4 (Successful Application Instance Execudependent decoherence, causing the quality of the links to
tion). We say an application instance executed successfully
decrease over time. The maximum age of a link depends
if all blocks are successfully executed, including receiving
both on the hardware of the specific end nodes and the iniconfirmation signals.
tial fidelity of the entangled link. One approach to satisfy
Definition IV.5 (Quantum Successful Execution). We these requirements is to strictly control the jitter between
say an application instance achieved quantum success if generated entangled links, for example as in [25]. However,
it was successfully executed and the correct outcome was we instead consider the generation of packets of entanglement, rather than individual links. The generation of a
obtained.
packet of entanglement corresponds to the co-existence of
Definition IV.6 (Minimal Service). We say a session all required entangled links for an instance of an appliobtains minimal service in the event of Ninst successfully cation. There is no time constraint between the generaexecuted instances of the application before the session tion of each packet of entanglement, as each instance of
expiry time texpiry elapses.
an application is independent. Therefore, following the
definitions in [76], any demands, both from sessions of
The aim of the network is to ensure that as many sesmeasure-directly and of create-and-keep applications can
sions as possible obtain minimal service. Note that in the
be treated as elastic.
literature, what we refer to as ‘quantum successful exeOne may also attempt to control the jitter between the
cution’ is commonly referred to as “application success”,
generation of packets, though the ability to do so will defor example, as in [16]. However, it is useful to make
pend on the network scheduling algorithm employed. Furthe distinction between an instance successfully executing
thermore, this should not be required in order for a netand an instance achieving quantum success. In particuwork application to be executed.
lar, the network aims to ensure sessions obtain minimal
The following definitions, motivated by the formalism
service. To do so, it facilitates the successful execution of
set
out in [22], precisely specify what is meant by packets
application instances by scheduling time to create packets
of
entanglement.
of entanglement. In contrast, the aim of end nodes is to
achieve quantum successes from successfully executed instances by suitably scheduling the execution of local gates
and operations.
We also define a notion of ‘load’ on the network, corresponding to the number of pairs of users which have
submitted demands for entanglement generation. In particular, if the load on the network is high, this should correspond to a decrease in the likelihood of a session obtaining minimal service from the network, due to the network
resources not being able to serve all submitted demands
simultaneously.
IV.iii.

Definition IV.7 (Window). A window in the context
of entanglement generation is the longest time that an
entangled link can be kept in memory without decohering
too much to be useful. If a link has been in memory for
longer than the length of the window it is discarded. In
particular, this means that all the entangled links required
to execute an instance of a quantum application need to be
generated within a time window’s duration of each other.
Definition IV.8 (Entanglement Packet). A packet of entanglement or entanglement packet for a given application
session is the tuple (w, s, Fmin ), where w is the time window within which all entangled links must be created, s
is the required number of entangled links and Fmin is the
minimum fidelity new links may be created with.

Demand Format

In order to schedule time for the generation of entangled
links the central controller requires two sets of information. Firstly, it needs to know the quantity and quality
of entangled links that must be produced. Secondly, it
requires knowledge of the frequency with which and over
what time period these entangled links must be produced.
Therefore, the demand format needs to capture all this

To see how this is useful, suppose Alice and Bob wish
to execute two instances of an application, each requiring
three entangled links. However, Alice and Bob’s hardware
is such that each entangled link can only be stored for 0.5s.
Instead of saying that Alice and Bob require 6 entangled
8

links with expected fidelity F , it is much more precise to
say they need two (0.5s, 3, F ) packets of entanglement. In
particular, if the network allocated resources such that Alice and Bob sequentially generated 6 entangled links, each
1 second apart from the other, this would satisfy the former requirement, but Alice and Bob would still not be able
to execute their applications successfully. By specifying
the packet of entanglement required, the network can allocate resources for sufficiently long periods in the network
schedule that the required entanglement, i.e. a packet, can
be produced. The packet formalism thereby ensures that
application instances can actually be executed.

Secondly, they include a minimum separation between attempts to generate packets of entanglement. This minimum separation is included to ensure that there is sufficient time for local operations to be performed before
the next allocated period of time for generating entangled
links begins. Local operations may either be additional
blocks of quantum operations in the application program
or operations to reset the hardware between subsequent
attempts to generate a packet.
Submitted rates may depend on factors such as how often the nodes intend to execute instances of an application,
as well as pre-existing device agreements with the network.
Thus, the values are determined as part of the capability
Definition IV.9 (Packet Suitability). We say that a negotiation phase. Determination of the minimum sepapacket of entanglement is suitable for an application if ration required between attempts to generation a packet
the existence of entangled links adhering to the form of and an appropriate expiry time also requires input from
the packet would allow an instance of the application to both nodes, thus these values are set during capability nebe executed with an acceptable probability of achieving gotiation.
quantum success.
IV.iii.c.

It is possible for an application instance to have multiple
suitable packets of entanglement. This may arise from, for
example, accepting links which are generated with a lower
expected fidelity and shortening the window to compensate. The end nodes could also include extra links which
may not be directly required by the protocol.
End nodes include a finite subset of all possible suitable
packets in their demand. We write P for the set of suitable
packets included in the demand.
In order to compute the set of suitable packets, the
nodes need to know what quality of entanglement the
network can produce, as well as the hardware on the
other node(s). These pieces of information are obtained
in the network capability update and capability negotiation
phases respectively. Given this, they can establish how
long the links can be stored in memory, and thus construct
the set of suitable packets.

Combining all of the above is the demand which end nodes
submit to the network:
n
o
D=
(w, s, F, R)p

p∈P


; tminsep , texpiry ; Ninst ,

(2)

where P is the set of submitted suitable packets.
As the demand format needs to be compatible
with all end nodes, the time dependent parameters
w, Rpacket , tminsep and texpiry should be specified in terms
of real-time units, such as seconds or per-second as applicable, rather than in terms of local or network time slots.
The central controller can then convert them to a notion of
time-slots, if required, when computing and distributing
the schedule.
IV.iv.

IV.iii.b.

Full Demand

Timing Constraints

Network Capabilities Update

To enable construction of the suitable packets of entanglement, firstly the end nodes need to know whether the
network can generate entangled links between them, and
secondly at what quality these links can be produced. Providing the nodes with this information is the primary objective of the network capabilities update phase of our architecture (interaction A in Figure 5).
The application stack obtains this information in the
following manner. Firstly, a query is sent to the quantum
network agent (QNA) (see Figure 5). This query can be
either for an overview of the network, or for the specific
entanglement generation capabilities with another party.
If the QNA has recently obtained the requested information, then it responds directly, otherwise the query is forwarded to the network capabilities manager of the central
controller.
In the case of an overview request, the response includes
with whom entanglement can be generated, as well as general information about the status of the network such as
the current load. If the application stack requests the capabilities for a specific node, this information is returned

We now address communicating the frequency and timeperiod over which packets of entanglement are produced.
For each suitable packet of entanglement, the nodes specify a average rate R at which they wish such packets to be
produced. This rate can be set to 0, which indicates to the
central controller that the nodes will be satisfied with the
minimum possible rate of packet generation which almost
certainly ensures the session obtains minimal service. In
this case, the nodes also submit Ninst as part of the demand, so the network can calculate this minimum rate
when the demand is accepted for scheduling.
The central controller will define a service model which
specifies how the requested rate will be treated. For example, the rate may be met exactly, or alternatively the
network may increase or decrease the rate at which packets are generated within specified limits, depending on the
current network load.
Alongside the packets and associated rates, the nodes
also submit two further pieces of timing information.
Firstly, they include the expiry time of the session texpiry .
9

in the form of (R, F ) rate-fidelity pairs describing the rate
at which end-to-end links can be generated with fidelity
F.
In order to determine the quality of entanglement which
can be generated, the central controller performs the
following tasks: First, it establishes along which paths
through the network entangled links can be generated.
Then, along these paths the central controller devises a
scheme which will enable end-to-end entangled links to be
produced. Using the information which the central controller has about the fidelity of the entangled links which
can be produced along each of the segments of this path,
the overall end-to-end fidelity can be determined and communicated back to the requesting end node’s quantum network agent.
The central controller retains the right to be selective
about which possibilities it communicates. For instance, it
may discount certain paths or configurations which would
put excessive pressure on the network. Furthermore, the
network only communicates the quality of entanglement
and not the paths back to the nodes. This is to give the
controller flexibility, where possible, to create the same
quality links using multiple different paths as well as to
maintain the agnosticism of the end nodes as to the internals of the network.

the demand is informed of the outcome of the demand registration process, and additionally can be informed as to
the reasons for rejection. In the case no such acknowledgement arrives, end nodes should assume that the demand
has been rejected.
The main aim of this process is to filter out any obviously infeasible or unreasonable demands. However, on
top of this, this process may also reject demands based on
the load which the network is experiencing. For example,
if load on the network is high, then the demand registration process may also immediately reject demands with a
high expected queuing time. The precise rules which the
demand registration process implements will depend on
the network implementation and the types of behaviour
which the network operator desires.
IV.vi.a.

Leaving the Demand Queue

Once a demand has been registered and placed into the
demand queue, there are a few ways in which it can be
removed from the queue. The positive outcome for a demand is that it passes the scheduler admission control, and
is accepted to be scheduled. Depending on the load on the
network and the nature of the demand, this may happen
at the start of the next scheduling interval. Alternatively,
a demand may possibly be held in the queue for several
scheduling intervals, until there is sufficient capacity for
the network to serve it.
IV.v. Capability Negotiation
The other main reason that a demand can be removed
Before any application can be run, or a demand submitted from the queue is if that demand expires. However, at
to the network, the nodes must align amongst themselves the discretion of the central controller, demands may also
exactly how the application will be run. Ultimately the be removed from the queue before they expire if such reaim of this is to create an application session and corre- moval benefits overall the overall performance of the netsponding demand, as well as finalising any metadata about work. For example, one such rule may be that any demand
the programs which still needs to be set.
which would have failed demand registration had it been
In order to do this, the nodes carry out capability ne- submitted at the current time is removed from the demand
gotiation (interaction B in Figure 5). During this phase queue. As with demand registration, the exact rules govthe nodes exchange relevant information, for example the erning premature removal from the demand queue should
quantity and quality of qubits which can be made avail- be specified in an implementation.
able and how other end nodes need to interact with their
programs. In particular, combined with the data from net- IV.vii. Session Initialisation
work capability update, the nodes should be able to exchange sufficient information to determine the acceptable Following capability negotiation and demand submission,
packets and calculate/decide upon the packet generation each end node performs some initial configuration (interrates they will request from the network. Furthermore, by action D in Figure 5). In particular, the blocks of inthe end of this exchange, the nodes will have decided upon structions that make up the program are submitted to the
local scheduler, and any initial configuration of the end
the values of Ninst , texpiry and tminsep .
Therefore, once capability negotiation has concluded, node’s quantum network stack is performed. An example
up to classical communication in the application itself, the of configuration of an end node’s quantum network stack
end nodes should be able to execute their programs inde- which may be required is the establishment of a quantum
pendently and without further interaction between them. network socket for the application, as in [16, 69], ensuring that generated entanglement is assigned to the correct
application.
IV.vi. Demand Registration
IV.viii. Processing Demands and Packet GenerWhen demands are received by the central controller (ination Tasks
teraction C in Figure 5), they undergo an initial registration process. If a demand passes this process, then it Whilst the demand format is sufficient for communicating
is placed into the demand queue for consideration by the the requirements of the nodes to the central controller, it
scheduler admission control. Otherwise, it is immediately is not an efficient format for use by a network schedulrejected by the network. The end node which submitted ing algorithm. Therefore, once a demand has passed the
10

SDN (Centralised) Controller
Demand
Registration

C

Scheduler
Admission

PGT
Creation

A

Network Capabilities Manager

Network Schedule
Computation

Network
Schedule

E

(E)

(C)
Quantum Network Agent

Quantum Network Agent
A

Network
Schedule

C

Node Schedule
Computation

CPS

Application
Stack
D

QPS

F
B

Application
Stack

Network
Schedule
F
Node Schedule
Computation

C,D

Quantum
Network
Stack

...

End Node A

Quantum
Network
Stack

G

G

G

QPS

CPS

End Node B

Figure 5: Interaction Diagram for our proposed quantum network architecture. Elements in red are local software
components. Single stroke arrows represent purely classical interactions and double-stroke arrows represent quantum
interactions. The dotted arrows denote the corresponding interaction from the other end node. The QPS and CPS
are the quantum processing system and classical processing system respectively. The application stack includes the
application code, compiler and execution environment. The Network Capabilities Manager is an oracle which can be
queried by end nodes to find out information about the network as part of the network capabilities update phase of the
architecture (IV.iv). The process of Scheduler Admission includes the demand queue. The Quantum Network Stack
is that of [21]. The ellipsis represents the quantum network. The labelled interactions are as follows: A: Network
Capability Update; B: Capability Negotiation; C: Demand Registration; D: Session Initialisation; E: Network Schedule
Distribution (note this goes to all components of the network); F: Input of network schedule into the local schedule;
G: Execution of the schedule(s).
demand registration phase, it is converted into a packet
generation task (PGT). This is an internal representation
of the demand containing only the information required
to construct the network schedule.

PGAs need to be scheduled, Rattempt . In particular, as the
value of ppacket increases, the required length of the PGA
increases, whilst the required rate of PGA decreases. Furthermore, as E and Rattempt change at different rates with
ppacket , the resource utilisation Uτ := Eτ Rτattempt for a
given packet generation task τ is not constant with ppacket .
IV.viii.a. Finite Execution Times
We will see in §IV.ix.a that the resource utilisation of
Due to the probabilistic nature of generating entangled packet generation tasks is an important quantity that delinks, it is impossible to guarantee that a packet will be termines how many or which demands can be accepted by
generated when any finite exectution time is allocated to a the scheduler admission control.
packet generation attempt (PGA). Therefore, the network
only guarantees that a packet will be generated in a given
PGA with some probability ppacket . This probability is
Algorithm 1: Determining ppacket
an internal parameter, known only to the network. The
Input : Network state, service agreements, w, s
rate at which PGAs are scheduled may be increased to
Output:
Probability of generating a packet in a
compensate for ppacket . The value of ppacket can either be
PGA, ppacket
static, or can alternatively be determined using a method
1 Determine the value of ppacket for given w, s given
conforming to Algorithm 1. Once the value of ppacket has
network conditions and adhering to service
been determined, the exectution time of each PGA, E can
agreements.
be determined, using a method conforming to Algorithm 2.
In the process of selecting ppacket , there is a trade-off between the length of each PGA, E, and the rate at which
11

EB
Node 2
Node 1

PGA A1

Node 0

PGA A1

PGA B1

Packet Generation
Attempt (PGA)

PGA B2

PGA B1

PGA A2

PGA B2

PGA A2

≥ tA
minsep

t
A
⌊1/Rattempt
⌋

Figure 6: Excerpt from an example network schedule with two PGTs τA = ((4, 1/7, {0, 1, M }), 2, 100) and τB =
((2, 1/7, {1, 2, M }), 0, 100) on three nodes, where M represents a number of resources at a metropolitan hub.
Algorithm 2: Determining the length of PGAs
Input : w, s, psucc , ppacket
Output: Length of a PGA, E
1 Calculate the shortest time E such that a packet
(w, s, F ) is generated with probability ppacket in
time E, given a probability of entangled link
generation psucc .

If permitted by the service model and any agreements
with nodes, the central controller also retains the right
to reduce, or throttle, the rates requested. This may be
done in order to reduce the load on the network due to
either a particular demand or the collection of all demands.
Reducing the rate at which PGAs are scheduled may allow
the network to serve more users at any one time, albeit
at the cost of an increased probability that the throttled
sessions do not obtain minimal service.

IV.viii.b.

IV.viii.c.

Setting the rate of packet generation
attempts

The next piece of information requiring computation by
the central controller is a suitable rate, Rattempt , at which
to schedule PGAs.
If the nodes request a fixed rate, then the service model
determines Rattempt . For example, if the service model
is such that the requested rate is met exactly, then the
central controller would set Rattempt = R/ppacket .
If the requested rate is 0, that is the nodes are requesting
the minimal rate to achieve minimal service, then the central controller needs to calculate this rate, using a method
conforming to Algorithm 3. In particular, the central controller sets a value εservice for the maximum probability
that any session does not obtain minimal service. This
parameter is known by both the central controller and the
relevant end nodes, and is set by the network operator
when initially setting the network up. From this, the minimum number of PGAs needed to meet the service threshold can be determined. Once this number is known, the
minimum rate can be calculated.
Algorithm 3: Determining the minimum rate of
PGAs
Input : Ninst , texpiry , current time, εservice ,
ppacket
Output: Minimum possible rate at which to
schedule PGAs.
1 Calculate the minimum number of PGAs, Nmin ,
required such that the probability of at least Ninst
packets being generated is at least 1 − εservice ;
2 return Nmin /(texpiry − current time)

Additional Information

The scheduler requires knowledge of the resource requirements ρ of each demand. These depend on the path and
entanglement generation protocol employed by the network to generate the desired entangled links, and can be
obtained from the central controller’s side of the network
capabilities manager. In addition, the parameters governing the minimum separation time between subsequent
PGAs, tminsep , and the expiry time of the demand, texpiry
are carried forward unchanged to the PGT. These final
quantities are combined with the execution time of each
PGA, E, and the rate at which PGAs should be scheduled,
Rattempt , to define the complete PGT.
IV.viii.d.

Complete Packet Generation Task

It is now possible to define the complete PGT.
Definition IV.10 (Realisation of a demand). A realisation of a demand is a specific choice of how PGAs from a
packet generation task will be executed. In particular, this
includes specifying a protocol for generating end-to-end
entangled links and which suitable packet will be generated. This also determines the path in the network along
which links will be generated, and therefore the resources
which will be required to execute each PGA.
We write the set of all possible realisations as R.
Definition IV.11 (Packet Generation Task). A packet
generation task (PGT) is the following tuple:
τ=



(E, Rattempt , ρ)r r∈R , tminsep , texpiry

where for each possible realisation r ∈ R:
12

(3)

• E is the execution time of each PGA

where Uτ = Er,τ Rτattempt and r is the specific realisation
which is scheduled. This is to ensure the schedules are
feasible.

• Rattempt is the average rate at which PGAs are scheduled.
• ρ is the set of resources which are required to execute
each PGA.

IV.ix.b.

Computing the Network Schedule

Once the admitted PGTs are finalised, the central controller constructs the network schedule for the next
scheduling interval, using a method conforming to Algorithm 4. In doing so, each PGT which has been accepted
for scheduling is assigned a series of start times, from each
of which a PGA is executed without preemption.
Such a schedule can be time-slotted, though this is not
required. If a time-slotted schedule is employed, the central controller determines the length of the time slots,
which are the same for all resources in the network schedule.
The computed network schedule needs to cover the entirety of a scheduling interval. This can be achieved either
by directly computing a schedule for the whole scheduling
interval or by computing a shorter schedule that can be
repeated to cover the whole scheduling interval.
A constraint applies to the time required to compute the
network schedule, and thus restricts the selection of a specific scheduling algorithm. This computation time should
IV.ix. Network Scheduling
be short enough so that a single scheduling interval covers
Algorithm 4 summarises the procedure of network schedul- computation and distribution of the schedule, followed by
ing. The procedure is subdivided into the processes of a final buffer time for the construction of local schedules.
scheduler admission control, computation of the schedule, End nodes require the final buffer to construct their local
and distribution of the schedule. Figure 4 illustrates pos- schedules, which incorporate the network schedule.
sible timings for each of these processes.
It is the role of an implementation to specify handling of
the situation where the schedule is not computed in time.
Algorithm 4: Network Scheduling
An example of a policy which may be employed would be
Input : Demands in queue, previously scheduled
to delay execution of the late computed schedule to the
PGTs, scheduling interval, service model
start of the following scheduling interval. Alternatively,
Output: Network Schedule
if the central controller distributes the schedule as soon
1 Decide which, if any, demands to accept from the
as possible then each network component could start exqueue into the schedule;
ecuting the schedule from the time when it is received.
2 Compute the schedule for the next scheduling
Whichever policy is enforced, however, if there is a gap
interval following the chosen service model;
between the end of the previous schedule and the arrival
3 Distribute the schedule to all relevant parties;
of a new schedule at a network component, a guideline
for implementation is to instruct all components to only
begin executing new PGAs upon the arrival of the new
schedule. This ensures proper synchronisation across all
IV.ix.a. Scheduler Admission Control
components.
At the start of each scheduling interval, the first task the
central controller undertakes is to identify which PGTs
should be given service in the next network schedule. Any IV.x. Distributing the Network Schedule
PGTs from the previous schedule which have not expired Once the schedule has been computed, it must be disor been terminated by the source nodes are automatically tributed to all components of the network. Each comcarried forward and new demands from the queue may also ponent only receives the portion of the network schedule
be admitted to the scheduler.
relevant to it. For example, an end node receives only its
Any specific implementation of our architecture may de- portion of the schedule, whereas a metropolitan hub refine a tailored admission control routine which addresses ceives the portion of the schedule concerning all nodes to
the performance goals of the implementation. However, a which it is connected.
guideline for any implementation is that the utilisation of
To ensure compatibility with requirements of the netany resource, Ur , should satisfy
work stack and the runtime application execution enviX
ronment on end nodes, the format of the schedule must
Ur =
Uτ ≤ 1,
be such that the relevant end nodes receive the start and
τ :r∈ρτ
The relation of these parameters to a network schedule
can be seen in Figure 6.
We make the distinction between demands, which pertain to the domain of the nodes and PGTs which pertain
to the domain of the central controller in order to maintain separability in the control structure. This separation
reinforces that the central controller may determine how
to realise a demand based on the information submitted
and its knowledge about the state of the wider network.
If the network scheduling algorithm supports it, the
packet generation task can be interpreted as a multi-mode
task, similar to as in [80]. In such a situation, the network
scheduler can choose the ‘best’ mode in which to schedule the packet generation task given the current network
load. If such behaviour is not supported, then the central
controller should reduce R to a single realisation/mode in
which the PGT is always scheduled.

13

Source
Application script
End node(s)
Central controller (configuration)
Central controller (calculation)
Path and protocol for entanglement generation

Supplied Parameters
w, s, F, tminsep
R, texpiry , Ninst
ppacket , εservice
E, Rattempt
psucc , ρ

Table 1: Table of entities (sources) and the parameters they provide.
end times of each scheduled PGA together with an identifier of which demand the scheduled PGA pertains to.
Various implementations are possible.
As indicated in Figure 4, sufficient time must be allotted for distribution of the network network schedule.
The interval reserved for distribution should be such that
the probability that the any component does not receive
the network schedule is vanishingly small. However, in
the case that a component does not receive the schedule on time, we expect that the affected components will
continue to request the network schedule from the central
controller. Furthermore, as with the case where the schedule is not computed on time, such components should not
start any new PGAs until they receive the correct schedule.
Once a network schedule is received by an end node,
it can compute its local schedule. This uses the network schedule to determine when submitted QC (entanglement generation) blocks are executed (interaction F
in Figure 5). The remaining instruction blocks are then
scheduled relative to these QC blocks [16, 81].
Once this process has been completed, the local and
network schedules can be executed, without any extra interaction either between pairs of end nodes and between
end nodes and any internal network components (interaction G in Figure 5).

V.

Implementation

In order to be able to perform an evaluation in §VI, we
provide an example implementation of the central controller in our architecture, focusing on the process of computing the network schedule. All the algorithms explicitly presented in this section are applicable to any network topology, with any applications being executed over
the network. Therefore, this implementation can act as
a baseline against which future implementations can be
compared.
V.i.

Service Model

For our implementation, the network operates under the
following network model:
Network Service Model SM1 (No Throttling). Under
this model, demands are met exactly, that is PGAs are
scheduled to on average meet exactly the rate requested
by the nodes. In the case where the network is oversubscribed, then demands which cannot be accepted to be
scheduled are delayed until there is space, or dropped if
they can never be served.
14

Note that this service model requires some admission
control for the scheduler, to decide which demands are
accepted for scheduling and which are delayed. We give
some examples of such rules in §V.vi.a.
This service model is particularly applicable to scenarios where nodes are relying on demands being met exactly.
An example of such a scenario would be using QKD to
underpin the availability and monitoring of secure critical
infrastructure. In such a case, a demand being throttled
could potentially result in loss of access to the infrastructure, due to not being able to generate keys quick enough.
Examples of such schemes include [82–84].
V.ii.

Network Capability Update

The evaluation will be performed on a network with a
star topology (Figure 7), as it removes any influence from
routing or determining schemes for generating end-to-end
entangled links. Consequently, we will not give implementations of such schemes. For examples of how routing may
be performed in more complicated network topologies, see
for example [85] and [86].
V.iii.

Capability Negotiation

We assume that capability negotiation is carried out using the exposed hardware interface (EHI) from Qoala [16].
This allows the end nodes to exchange information about
the hardware and software constraints of their devices.
V.iv.

Demand Registration and Queuing

We use the following set of rules for demand registration:
Demand Registration Rule DR1. The demand must
be sane, in particular, w ≥ s and both parties are capable
of generating entangled links.
Demand Registration Rule DR2. Let the utilisation
of a PGT τ with execution time E and period T be Uτ =
E/T . Then the utilisation of a PGT resulting from at
least one of the requested service options must be less
than Û = 0.8.
Once demands are registered, they are placed into a
first-in-first-out (FIFO) queue for consideration by the
scheduler admission control.
V.v.

Creating Packet Generation Tasks

We use a fixed value for the probability, ppacket , that a
packet is successfully generated by a PGA. Then, to de-

termine the length of a PGA, we use results from scan
statistics. Specifically we use the approximations in [23]
(also given in Appendix E.I.a) for the probability of k successes in a window w given a total of N trials. From this
we can calculate the minimum execution time of the PGA,
such that the PGA succeeds with probability ppacket , using
interval bisection.
If the nodes have requested the central controller calculate the minimum rate (R = 0), we use Hoeffding’s
inequality to calculate the minimal Nmin such that after Nmin PGAs, the session obtains minimal service with
probability 1 − εservice . The rate of packet generation attempts is then set by Nmin /(texpiry − [current time]).
This process is described in detail in Appendix E.II. Otherwise (R > 0), we simply set Rattempt = p−1
packet R
V.vi.
V.vi.a.

Network Scheduling
Admission of New Demands

The central controller decides which demands to remove
from the queue by checking if accepting a demand would
violate either of the following rules:
Scheduler Admission Control Rule SAC1 (Utilisation Bound). For all resources r, the utilisation of r, Ur ,
must satisfy
X
Ur =
Uτ ≤ Û
(4)
τ :r∈ρτ

for some constant Û ∈ (0, 1].
Scheduler Admission Control Rule SAC2 (Computation Time Bound). The estimated time to compute the
network schedule cannot exceed αC TSI , for some constant
αC ∈ (0, 1).
If neither rule is violated, then the demand is accepted
and the corresponding PGT created. Otherwise, unless
DR2 is violated, the demand is returned to the head of the
queue. Note that as we use a FIFO queue demands can
only be accepted in the order they were submitted, so if
a given demand fails admission control, no more demands
can be accepted from the demand queue.
Û is restricted to (0, 1] as if any Ur > 1, then there is not
physically enough time to schedule all the required PGAs.
Note as well that the estimated computation time in
SAC2 may be continuously updated by the central controller based on its current performance when computing
network schedules. Furthermore, we cannot take αC ≥ 1
as there must be some time remaining in the scheduling
interval to distribute the schedule, as per Figure 4.
We write T to be the set of PGTs from demands which
have passed admission control and have not expired or
been terminated. Once a demand has been terminated
or expires, then no more PGAs will be scheduled from it.
Therefore T is the set of PGTs from which we need to
schedule PGAs in the next network schedule.
V.vi.b.

and use a time-slotted network schedule, similar to as
in [25]. In particular, we will use earliest deadline first
(EDF) scheduling, and adapt the following model, which is
common to real-time periodic scheduling (c.f., [87, 88]): A
periodic task creates jobs. Each of these jobs is released at
some time r, only after which can it be executed, and must
be completed by a deadline d. If a job is the ith released by
a task, then its release time is given by r = (i − 1)T + σ
where T is the period of the task and σ is an offset determining how long after the start of the schedule the first job
is released. The corresponding deadline is then set to the
start of the next period, i.e. d = r + T = iT + σ.
In our case, the tasks are PGTs and the jobs are PGAs.
Following the definitions in [87], we take our deadlines to
be soft, which permits PGAs to be scheduled past their
deadlines if it is not possible to do otherwise. In this
way, no PGAs will be skipped, and so the average rate of
packet generation experienced by the end nodes will be as
they requested over the course of the entire lifetime of the
demand.
To be able to determine the release times and deadlines
of each PGA, the period of the PGT is required. This is
given by


1
,
(5)
Tattempt =
Rattempt ttimeslot N
where we write [x]N to be x rounded to the nearest positive
integer and ttimeslot is the duration of a timeslot in the
network schedule. We also need to determine the offset
σi . This is set to be the start of the scheduling interval
during which PGT τi is first scheduled.
We can now determine the release time and deadlines
of each PGA which needs to be scheduled. For τi ∈ T ,
let τi,j be the jth PGA from PGT i. Let Ti and σi be
the period and offset of τi respectively, let ri,j , di,j be the
release time and deadline of τi,j , and let si,j and ci,j be
the start and completion times of τi,j , respectively. Then,
ri,j = σi + max{(j − 1)Ti , ci,j−1 + tminsep,i }

(6)

di,j = σi + jTi

(7)



where j = 1, ..., (texpiry,i − σi )/Ti . Note that we adapt
the determination of the release times from the usual formula in order to incorporate the minimum separation time
between two PGAs.
Definition V.1 (Eligibility for scheduling of a PGA). We
say that a PGA τi,j is eligible for scheduling at time t∗ if
it meets the following criteria:
1. It has been released (t∗ > ri,j )
2. It has not yet been scheduled (the start time si,j is
undefined)
3. The required resources are available

Computing the Network Schedule

The schedule is then computed according to AlgoTo calculate the network schedule, we adapt priority-based
periodic task scheduling methods from real time systems, rithm 5.
15

are able to draw conclusions about the need for good admission control and how nodes should decide what rates
of packet generation to request.

Algorithm 5: EDF Scheduling Algorithm.
Input : Desired schedule length, PGTs to be
scheduled, T
Output: Scheduled PGAs
∗
1 Set the initial decision time t to the time at the
start of the schedule;
∗
2 while t is less than the end time of the schedule
do
3
while there are eligible PGAs do
4
Schedule the eligible PGA with the earliest
deadline;
5
Update the set of eligible PGAs;
6
end
7
Update t∗ to the next time either a task is
released, a task completes execution, or the
end of the scheduling interval, whichever is
earlier ;
8 end

VI.i.

Metrics

Definition VI.1 (Termination of a Session). We say a
session is terminated if the session has obtained minimal
service and sent a termination message to the central controller. This results in no further time being allocated
for this demand beyond the end of the schedule currently
being computed.
Definition VI.2 (Expiry of a session). We say a session
is expired if the expiry time has elapsed without a termination message being received. No packet generation
attempts will be scheduled after the expiry time.
Note that a session can expire and still have obtained
minimal service, if the nodes choose not to send the termination message and carry on generating packets. Likewise,
a node could choose to send a termination message before
obtaining minimal service. However, we assume in our
evaluation that neither of these behaviours occur.
Metric I (Proportion of Expired or Terminated Sessions
Obtaining Minimal Service). Let S be the set of application sessions initiated in a given simulation. Let Ŝ ⊆ S
be the set of those application sessions which are expired
or terminated. Let M ⊆ Ŝ be the set of those application
sessions which obtained minimal service. Then the metric,
pM S , is given by

Figure 7: Example of a star-topology network with 6
nodes. The outer circles represent the end nodes and the
central hexagon a central junction node. In each network
time-slot the central node can attempt to create an entangled link with each of the end nodes, and then perform entanglement swaps to create end-to-end links between pairs
of end nodes. The orange dots represent communication
qubits and the black dots represent memory qubits.

pM S =

|M|
|Ŝ|

∈ [0, 1].

(8)

Such a metric is important to both the end nodes and
the central controller. End nodes can use this to estimate
the likelihood of a submitted application session obtaining
minimal service, and therefore what quality of service the
V.vii. End Node Scheduling
network can provide. On the other hand, by monitoring
As our evaluation focuses on the network portion of the this metric, the central controller can assess the effectivearchitecture, we do not compute the local schedules. We ness of the (scheduler) admission control rules given the
assume that node schedules exist which facilitate the suc- traffic on the network, and update them accordingly.
cessful execution of an application instance given that
packet generation succeeds. For examples of methods Metric II (Average Time Spent in Queue). Let tsubmit,S
of constructing schedules on end nodes, see for example be the time the demand corresponding to session S is subthe scheduler built into the Qoala environment simulation mitted to the central controller. Let texit,S be the time
that the demand corresponding to session S leaves the
in [16] or one of the schedulers used in [15, 81].
queue. Then the metric is given by


1 X
VI. Evaluation
t̄queue =
texit,S − tsubmit,S .
(9)
|S|
S∈S
We now evaluate the performance our network architecture using the implementation we described in the previFor end nodes, evaluating this metric gives them an esous section. For the simulations we perform, we use two timation of the expected latency between submitting a
test applications from different application classes. We de- demand and receiving service. This in turn can then be
fine the performance metrics we consider, and where rel- used to estimate the load on the network, and even inform
evant we provide further details about the precise model the choice of expiry time for the application session. For
used in our simulations. Further details about the simula- the central controller, this metric gives an estimation of
tion model can be found in Appendix F. From the results how overloaded the network is, especially in conjunction
we obtain we validate the viability of our architecture and with pM S . Using this, the central controller can control
16

Parameter
Network time-slot length
pgen
F
qubits at end node

Value
100 µs
7.5 × 10−5
0.925
5

be scheduled, but there is a non-preemptable lower priority task which is currently being executed preventing
the higher priority task from being scheduled [88]. As
it is non-trivial to determine if a deadline will be missed
without computing the schedule [75], we instead reduce
the utilisation bound to reduce the probability that a priority inversion causes a missed deadline. By performing
additional simulations beyond those reported on here, we
observed that the conclusions we draw hold for any value
of Û < 1.

Table 2: Network Parameters for Evaluation. pgen is the
probability of an end-to-end entangled link being created
in a given time-slot. The trends we observe are generally
insensitive to the value of pgen .
Parameter
ppacket
εservice
PGA cap per schedule
Utilisation Bound per link, Û
Computation time factor, αC
Scheduling Interval (MDA|CKA)

Value
0.2
10−5
1500
0.85
0.5
300s | 3600s

VI.iii.b.

Table 3: Scheduler Parameters for Evaluation. Except
where noted, the trends that we observe are insensitive to
the specific values chosen here.
the overload by either adapting the admission control rules
as required, or even requesting that nodes reduce the rate
at which new demands are submitted.
VI.ii.

Network Configuration

We consider a network consisting of 6 end nodes connected
to a single central node as shown in Figure 7. Each end
node is equipped with 5 qubits, of which at most one can
be used for entanglement generation at any given time.
The central node also has 6 independent communication
qubits with no storage capability beyond the current network time slot. We assume that in every time slot, an
elementary entangled link may be generated between each
end node and the central node.
Links with the central hub are consumed by performing
deterministic entanglement swapping operations to generate end-to-end entangled links between pairs of end nodes.
The swap operations which are carried out are determined
by which pairs of end nodes have a PGA scheduled in that
time slot. We assume that the central node has no quantum memory and therefore any link which is generated
must be consumed within the same time slot or be lost.
We therefore simulate a mathematically equivalent
model, whereby for each disjoint pair of nodes, an endto-end link may be generated in each time slot with fixed
probability pgen ≪ 1.

We set αC = 0.5, i.e. network schedules cannot take more
than half the scheduling interval to compute. However, to
avoid our results depending on the hardware of the server
on which we perform our simulations, we do not directly
implement SAC2.
As the time to compute the schedule depends on the
number of PGAs which will need to be scheduled, the central controller can implement this rule by imposing a cap
on the estimated number of PGAs which need scheduling
in a given scheduling period. Therefore, we simply fix this
cap a priori and do not update it based on the observed
computation times.
The central controller will be running on dedicated
hardware in any actual deployment. This means that we
do not expect the computation times to fluctuate much as
there are no other background processes consuming CPU
resources. Therefore, despite fixing this cap on the number
of PGAs per schedule to be constant, the results obtained
will still be indicative of real-world performance.
In our simulations, we set this cap to 1500 PGAs per
schedule. This is motivated by empirical characterisation
of the time our computation server takes to calculate the
network schedule for various number of PGAs, more details of which can be found in Appendix F.II.
VI.iv.

VI.iii.a.

Session Model

VI.iv.a.

Creation time

M S/E

Let tS
be the time at the end of the scheduling interval during which application session S either expires
or obtains minimal service, and let trenew be an exponentially distributed waiting time with parameter λ. Then the
nodes involved in S begin a new session S ′ of the same apM S/E
plication at time tS
+ trenew . In each simulation, the
value of λ is the same for all pairs of nodes.
VI.iv.b.

VI.iii.

Schedule Computation Time

Contents

In each of our simulations, all pairs of nodes execute the
same application sessions. Two test applications are considered: the first is a measure-directly application motivated by QKD (hereafter MDA), and the second is a
create-and-keep application motivated by the blind quantum computing algorithm in [79] (hereafter CKA). For further discussion of the distinction between measure-directly
and create-and-keep application classes refer to Section

Admission Control
Utilisation Bound

We set the value of the utilisation bound Û = 0.85. A
restriction to Û ≤ 1 is necessary to ensure the schedule
is feasible. However, as the tasks are non-preemptable,
this is not a sufficient condition because of so-called priority inversions. These occur when a task is available to
17

III.ii.b. The Qoala files we use for these test applications
are given in Appendix F.V.
We fill out the remaining fields in the application sessions as follows:
S = (N , APP, Ninst = 100, texpiry = tsubmit + tmax duration )
(10)
where APP ∈ {MDA, CKA}, tsubmit is the time the corresponding demand is submitted to the central controller
and tmax duration is the maximum duration of a session.
We acknowledge that the value of Ninst = 100 is very
low, as for example a typical QKD application would require Ninst ≫ 105 . However, we make this choice for simulation purposes, as it cuts down the required run time of
our simulations (some of which run in almost real-time).
We expect that the conclusions drawn from our simulation results remain valid when Ninst is increased to values
which more accurately reflects the requirements of real-life
applications.
VI.iv.c.

Peer-to-Peer vs Client-Server

We consider two regimes under which pairs of nodes execute sessions, peer-to-peer and client-server. In the peerto-peer regime, an end node can undertake an application
session with any other end node. This is the type of behaviour we would expect for applications such as QKD,
where every end node in the network is capable of carrying out the application.
In the client-server regime, one of the nodes is designated as the ‘server’, and the rest as ‘clients’. Client nodes
are only able to undertake sessions with the server and not
with each other. This type of behaviour we would expect
for applications such as BQC, where one end node needs
to be much more powerful than the other.
We use the first regime for modelling MDA traffic and the
second for CKA traffic.
VI.iv.d.

Termination of Demands

We assume that nodes will send a message to the central controller to terminate their demand as soon as they
obtain minimal service. Once a demand is terminated,
it is not considered further for scheduling. Nodes will,
however, continue to execute application instances whilst
there is time allocated in the network schedule.
VI.v.

Results

Simulation of the implementation (Section V) of our network architecture is an opportunity to confirm the feasibility of our architecture and to asses the performance of
an implementation, as quantified by the metrics in Section
VI.i. These metrics may depend on parameters that are
specific to how users demand service from the network as
well as on the types of applications from which user demands originate. We focus on assessing how changes to
the parameters λ and R, respectively the session renewal
rate and the requested rate of packet generation, impact
the values obtained for the performance metrics. To asses
the impact of the type of application, we also compare the
18

results of simulations where all nodes are running the MDA
test application in the peer-to-peer regime (Figure 8) to
simulations where all nodes are running the CKA application in the client-server regime (Figure 9).
VI.v.a.

Facilitation of obtaining minimal service

The most important criteria that a network architecture
must meet in order to be considered viable is the capability to meet user demands. Here we quantify the degree to
which an implementation of our architecture meets user
demands with the performance metric proportion of expired or terminated sessions which obtain minimal service,
pM S , quantified by (8). For each of the test applications
simulated we observe that the implementation of our network architecture is able to successfully deliver minimal
service to some proportion of sessions. For the MDA test application operated in the peer-to-peer regime (Figure 8a)
the proportion of demands which obtain minimal service
is always at least 0.45, for all parameter combinations simulated. In complement, we observe that for the CKA test
application operated in the client-server regime a much
higher proportion (>0.98) of sessions obtain minimal service, for each combination of the parameters simulated.
This general increase in the value of pM S between the
client-server CKA and peer-to-peer MDA simulations can be
attributed in part to the decrease in the number of possible demands. In the client server regime, there are only
5 sources of demands, whereas in the peer-to-peer regime
there are 15 possible sources of demands. As each source
only has a single demand registered at any time, the maximum length of the queue is much shorter in the clientserver CKA simulations. This in turn means that as a fraction of the value of tmax duration , the average queuing times
are much shorter in the CKA simulations, which leads to
greater values of pM S .
From Figures 8a and 9a it is clear that the session renewal rate λ and the requested rate of packet generation
R have a large impact on the proportion of sessions which
obtain minimal service. In particular, as λ increases, the
proportion of sessions which obtain minimal service may
only decrease. This is the expected behaviour, as an increase in λ directly translates into increased load on the
network. We do note that in the case where R = 0.001Hz
in Figure 9a, pM S = 1 for all λ, with only a small non-zero
standard deviation for λ > 2 × 10−5 . This indicates that
there are parameter regimes where it is possible for all
nodes to obtain minimal service, regardless of the session
renewal rate. Figures 8b and 9b confirm that the average
time a demand spends in the queue, tqueue always increases
as λ increases. An extension of the duration of time that
demands spend queued is direct evidence of increased load
on the network.
The effect of R is more subtle, as we consider two values
of a fixed rate as well as an adaptive rate. In the case of
the MDA test application operated in peer-to-peer mode
(Figure 8) the lower fixed rate results in higher pM S for
all values of λ. In contrast, for the CKA test application
operated in client-server mode, the lower fixed rate results
in lower pM S . See § VI.v.d for an explanation for why this

0.9

Average time spent in
demand queue, tqueue (s)

Proportion of sessions obtaining
minimal service, pMS (a.u.)

1400

1.0

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

adaptive rate
fixed, R = 0.1 Hz
fixed, R = 0.2 Hz

0.0000 0.0005 0.0010 0.0015 0.0020 0.0025
Session renewal rate (s 1)

1200

adaptive rate
fixed, R = 0.1 Hz
fixed, R = 0.2 Hz

1000
800
600
400
200
0.0000 0.0005 0.0010 0.0015 0.0020 0.0025
Session renewal rate (s 1)

(a)

(b)

Figure 8: Results from simulations for peer-to-peer MDA on a six-node star network. (a) Proportion of initiated sessions
which obtained minimal service from the network. (b) The average time a demand spent in the demand queue. The
shaded area represents ±1σ. The red dotted line represents the expected value of t̄queue for a single pair of end nodes
submitting demands. The total simulated time was 6 hours. To produce each data point we average the results of
100 simulations, with simulations where zero sessions were initiated removed. There were no such simulation runs
observed.
is the case. However, as could be expected, for both testapplications the lower fixed rate results in lower t̄queue .
This is expected because a lower fixed rate again translates
to lower load on the network.
In section §VI.v.c, we comment on the effectiveness of
adaptive rate requests, in comparison to requests for fixed
rates.

high of a rate of packet generation, then the nodes would
re-submit this demand with, for example, lower values of
R. From the data we observed, we can conclude that the
demand registration rules in our implementation were not
stringent enough for the peer-to-peer MDA scenario. In particular, the fixed rate R = 0.2Hz demands probably should
almost always have been rejected, as by accepting them it
led to a situation where a significant proportion of sessions
were not able to obtain minimal service from the network
VI.v.b. Admission Control Requirements
(up to 50% by λ = 0.0025). However, the same set of
Whilst being able to facilitate some application sessions admission control rules was sufficient for the client-server
MS
> 0.98 for all λ). Therefore, when deobtaining minimal service is sufficient for our architecture CKA scenario (p
to be viable, it is desirable that this is the case for as signing the set of admission control rules to implement,
many sessions as possible. In the peer-to-peer MDA simu- not only should the properties of the demands themselves
lations, however, we observe that the value of pM S drops be taken into account, but also the frequency and number
below 0.6 for the adaptive rate demands and below 0.5 for of demands which the central controller expects to receive.
the fixed R = 0.2Hz requests as λ increases. This is due
to the increased load which these demands place on the VI.v.c. Controls on Requesting Adaptive Rates
network, compared to the demands with a fixed rate of
R = 0.1Hz. In particular, as each demand/PGT requires When nodes submit a demand to the network, they may
a greater utilisation of the links to the central junction either request a fixed or adaptive rate of packet generanode, fewer demands can be served at any one time. This tion. One may expect that requesting an adaptive rate of
leads to increased queuing times as observed in Figure 8b. packets is beneficial, as any time that the demand spends
Therefore, a greater number of demands reach their ex- queuing is accounted for when determining how frequently
piry time without getting scheduled, and moreover those PGAs need to be scheduled. For adaptive rates therefore,
demands which are accepted for scheduling have much less the process of queuing should not affect the probability
time for generating packets, leading to a lower probability that a session obtains minimal service, and the value of
pM S for adaptive rate demands should be greater than
of obtaining minimal service.
MS
To prevent the value of p
from dropping so far, the that of fixed rate demands for all λ.
central controller should not allow the network to become
In both the peer-to-peer MDA and the client-server CKA
so overloaded. This may be achieved through the admis- simulations, this expected behaviour is observed for small
sion control rules employed, both at demand registration values of λ, with the value of pM S matching the value of
and scheduler admission. In particular, we expect that the best fixed rate demands. However, once the value of λ
if a demand is rejected, for example for requesting too passes a critical value (0.001 for MDA and 10−5 for CKA), the
19

1.2
Average time spent in
demand queue, tqueue (s)

Proportion of sessions obtaining
minimal service, pMS (a.u.)

1.000
0.998
0.996
0.994
0.992
0.990
0.988
0.986
0.984

adaptive rate
fixed, R = 0.0005 Hz
fixed, R = 0.001 Hz

0.0

1.0

(a)

adaptive rate
fixed, R = 0.0005 Hz
fixed, R = 0.001 Hz

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Session renewal rate (s 1) 1e 5

1e5

0.0

0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Session renewal rate (s 1)

2.5
1e 5

(b)

Figure 9: Results from simulations for client-server CKA on a six-node star network. (a) Proportion of initiated sessions
which obtained minimal service from the network. (b) The average time a demand spent in the demand queue. The
shaded region represents ±1σ. The red dotted line represents the expected value of t̄queue for a single pair of end nodes
submitting demands. The total simulated time was 360 days. All data points are the average of 250 simulations, with
simulations where zero sessions were initiated removed. There were no such simulation runs observed.
haviour could be captured by requesting a high fixed rate
of generation, substantially larger than the minimum rate
to generate the required packets across the full half hour
before the application session expires. Furthermore, as we
have seen in the previous section, there are even some network conditions where requesting a fixed rate will lead to
a greater likelihood of obtaining minimal service from the
network.
From the results of the peer-to-peer MDA simulations in
Figure 8, we observe that it is beneficial for end nodes to
request a lower rate of packet generation. This not only
leads to an increased value of pM S , but also shorter queuing times and latency before being scheduled. In comparison, in the client-server CKA simulations, we observe the
opposite effect. Whilst increasing the requested rate of
packets does increase the queuing time, the value of pM S
also increases (it is exactly 1 for all λ).
We can explain this behaviour as follows: In general it
is beneficial to request a higher rate of packet generation.
Requesting a higher rate of packet generation will result
in more PGAs being scheduled in any given time interval, increasing the likelihood of obtaining minimal service.
In particular, this also makes them more resilient against
having to wait in the demand queue.
However, higher rates also results in longer queuing
VI.v.d. Best Fixed Rate for Nodes to Request
times through greater utilisation and PGA contributions
End nodes may alternatively derive some benefits by re- to a schedule. Therefore, there is a critical value of R,
questing a fixed rate of packet generation. For instance, depending on the demands and demand submission charthe rate of packet generation will be independent of any acteristics, where the effects from extended queuing times
other network traffic, and can be chosen to reflect other starts to outweigh the benefits of potentially more PGAs
requirements of the application not captured by, say the being scheduled. This is precisely what we see in Figure 8a
expiry time. For example, suppose that Alice and Bob with the fixed R = 0.2Hz demands for peer-to-peer MDA.
want to generate a QKD key within the next half hour, On the other hand, for the client-server CKA, R = 0.001Hz
but once they start generating the key, they want to com- is still below this critical value of R, and so the demands
plete key generation within a minute. This desired be- gain all the benefits of scheduling PGAs at a higher rate.
value of pM S for the adaptive rate demands is less than
that for at least one of the fixed rate demands.
This reversal can be explained by considering the effect
that queuing has on the rate at which PGAs are scheduled,
Rattempt , for adaptive rate demands. Recall that when end
nodes request an adaptive rate, the central controller will
attempt to schedule at least Nmin (equal to 850 for both
test applications) PGAs in the time before the demand
expires. This ensures that given a demand is accepted for
scheduling, the session will obtain minimal service with
probability at least 1 − εservice . The consequence of this
is that the longer an adaptive rate demand waits in the
demand queue, the greater the resulting value of Rattempt
will be. This in turn leads to each PGT contributing more
PGAs to a schedule, and utilising more of the resources in
the network. Therefore, fewer PGTs can be scheduled in
any given network schedule, leading to even longer queuing
times and creating a feedback loop. In particular, more
demands will expire before being scheduled, leading to the
observed decrease in the value of pM S . This queuing behaviour is also reflected in Figures 8b and 9b, where a
(sharp) increase in the value of t̄queue occurs as λ passes
the critical values above.

20

The existence of such a critical value of R is not surprising, like a good idea, they require extra care to handle to avoid
as networks with control of limited numbers of resources the unintended consequence of leading to overload on the
are well known to have finite capacity regions (e.g. [60,89]) network. Whilst such requests are good at adapting to
momentary variations in the load on the network, if the
increased demand is sustained then the benefits are lost.
VII. Conclusions and Future Work
This is consistent with previous work on rate control algorithms in both the classical and quantum domain, which
We have designed a novel architecture for a quantum net- suggests that for variable request rates to be effective they
work which allows for the integration of network schedul- need to be combined with a rate control algorithm (see for
ing with local program execution. This is achieved by example [60, 89]). It remains to determine conditions on
introducing an application-motivated demand format for when precisely when this occurs, and bounds on how much
end nodes to request packets of entanglement generation. the value of R
attempt otherwise may vary by without causThis is in contrast to more limited demand formats in ing an overload.
previous work. In such demands, one requests a rate of
Similarly, the optimal fixed rate which nodes should reend-to-end entangled link generation, which fails to cap- quest merits further investigation. We have shown here
ture some of the requirements for executing applications. that in some cases it is better to request a higher fixed
We also defined a scheme for producing network sched- rate, and in other cases it is better to request a lower fixed
ules in a format which can be used by the local execution rate. However, it remains to determine percisely what is
environment on an end node to more efficiently schedule causing this bifurcation, and what the optimal rate to relocal operations. To do this, we introduced packet gener- quest is.
ation tasks and packet generation attempts to allow the
central controller of the quantum network to effectively
VIII. Acknowledgements
allocate the use of shared resources in order to satisfy submitted demands.
We presented an example implementation of our archi- TB, HJ, SG and SW acknowledge funding from the Quantecture using a network scheduler based on EDF schedul- tum Internet Alliance (QIA). QIA has received funding. Using this implementation, we performed numeri- ing from the European Union’s Horizon Europe research
cal simulations of our architecture on a star-shaped net- and innovation programme under grant agreement No.
work. The results of these numerical simulations highlight 101102140. SW also acknowledges funding from NWO
that the architecture successfully provides application ses- VICI. We thank Wojciech Kozlowski and Ingmar te Raa
sions with minimal service, both for measure-directly and for critical feedback on the content of this manuscript and
create-and-keep type applications. Furthermore, we have thank Bart van de Vecht for advice about Qoala.
seen that there is a need for smart admission control, both
in selecting which demands are accepted upon arrival and
References
in selecting which queued demands to accept for scheduling. Finally, according to the performance metric of the [1] A. K. Ekert, “Quantum cryptography based on Bell’s
proportion of sessions obtaining minimal service, we have
theorem,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 67, no. 6,
seen that there is no single best fixed rate to request, but
pp. 661–663, Aug. 1991. [Online]. Available: https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.67.661
rather the optimal rate depends on current traffic on the
network.
[2] C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, “Quantum cryptography:
Our contributions open up many opportunities for fuPublic key distribution and coin tossing,” in Proceedings
ture research. Each of the phases of the architecture, from
of the International Conference on Computers, Systems &
Signal Processing, Bangalore, India, vol. 1. IEEE, 1984,
admission control, to queuing, to computing the network
pp. 175–179.
schedule, requires a tailored algorithm. Design and optimisation of various possibilities for each type of algorithm [3] P. Arright and L. Salvail, “Blind quantum computation,”
merits in depth investigation. The properties of such algoInternational Journal of Quantum Information, vol. 04,
no. 05, pp. 883–898, 2006.
rithms directly impact the performance of the network. In
particular, the choice of scheduling algorithm will have a [4] A. Broadbent, J. Fitzsimons, and E. Kashefi, “Univergreat effect on the specific performance guarantees which
sal Blind Quantum Computation,” in 2009 50th Annual
the network can promise to the nodes.
IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science.
We have shown that there is a need for efficient admisAtlanta, Georgia, USA: IEEE, Oct. 2009, pp. 517–526.
sion control. An algorithm for admission control should be [5] A. M. Childs, “Secure assisted quantum computation,”
tailored to enforce the desired network behaviour and to
Quantum Information and Computation, vol. 5, no. 6,
account for the expected traffic on the network. Given a
2005, arXiv:quant-ph/0111046. [Online]. Available: http:
target set of performance metrics, the impact of an admis//arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0111046
sion control algorithm depends strongly on the scheduling [6] S. Tani, H. Kobayashi, and K. Matsumoto, “Exact
algorithm. Thus, we expect scheduling algorithm design
Quantum Algorithms for the Leader Election Problem,”
to inform the design of admission control algorithms, perACM Transactions on Computation Theory, vol. 4,
haps following some of the same ideas as in [90].
no. 1, pp. 1–24, Mar. 2012. [Online]. Available:
We also showed that whilst adaptive rates may seem
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2141938.2141939
21

[7] S. Wehner, D. Elkouss, and R. Hanson, “Quantum
internet:
A vision for the road ahead,” Science,
Oct. 2018, publisher: American Association for the
Advancement of Science. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aam9288
[8] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, “Can
quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be
considered complete?”
Physical Review, vol. 47,
no. 10, pp. 777–780, 1935. [Online]. Available: https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.47.777
[9] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang,
Quantum
Computation
and
Quantum
Information:
10th
Anniversary
Edition.
Cambridge
University Press, 2010, ISBN: 9780511976667 Publisher:
Cambridge University Press. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cambridge.org/highereducation/books/
quantum-computation-and-quantum-information/
01E10196D0A682A6AEFFEA52D53BE9AE
[10] W. Dür, H.-J. Briegel, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller,
“Quantum repeaters based on entanglement purification,”
Physical Review A, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 169–181, Jan. 1999,
publisher: American Physical Society. [Online]. Available:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.59.169
[11] M. Pompili, S. L. N. Hermans, S. Baier, H. K. C.
Beukers, P. C. Humphreys, R. N. Schouten, R. F. L.
Vermeulen, M. J. Tiggelman, L. dos Santos Martins,
B. Dirkse, S. Wehner, and R. Hanson, “Realization
of a multinode quantum network of remote solidstate qubits,” Science, vol. 372, no. 6539, pp. 259–
264, Apr. 2021, publisher:
American Association
for the Advancement of Science. [Online]. Available:
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abg1919
[12] Á. G. Iñesta, G. Vardoyan, L. Scavuzzo, and S. Wehner,
“Optimal entanglement distribution policies in homogeneous repeater chains with cutoffs,” npj Quantum
Information, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–7, May 2023, number: 1
Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41534-023-00713-9
[13] C. Cabrillo, J. I. Cirac, P. García-Fernández, and
P. Zoller, “Creation of entangled states of distant
atoms by interference,” Physical Review A, vol. 59,
no. 2, pp. 1025–1033, Feb. 1999. [Online]. Available:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.59.1025
[14] C. E. Bradley, S. W. de Bone, P. F. W. Moller,
S. Baier, M. J. Degen, S. J. H. Loenen, H. P. Bartling,
M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, R. Hanson, D. Elkouss, and
T. H. Taminiau, “Robust quantum-network memory based
on spin qubits in isotopically engineered diamond,” Nov.
2021, arXiv:2111.09772 [cond-mat, physics:quant-ph].
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2111.09772
[15] C. D. Donne, M. Iuliano, B. van der Vecht, G. M.
Ferreira, H. Jirovská, T. van der Steenhoven, A. Dahlberg,
M. Skrzypczyk, D. Fioretto, M. Teller, P. Filippov,
A. R.-P. Montblanch, J. Fischer, B. van Ommen,
N. Demetriou, D. Leichtle, L. Music, H. Ollivier,
I. te Raa, W. Kozlowski, T. Taminiau, P. Pawełczak,
T. Northup, R. Hanson, and S. Wehner, “Design and
demonstration of an operating system for executing
applications on quantum network nodes,” 2024. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18306
[16] B. van der Vecht, A. T. Yücel, H. Jirovská, and S. Wehner,
“Qoala:
an application execution environment for

22

quantum internet nodes,” 2025, arXiv:2502.17296 [quantph]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17296
[17] T. R. Beauchamp, H. Jirovská, S. Gauthier, and
S. Wehner, “Data and code for "a modular quantum network architecture for integrating network scheduling with
local program execution.",” 2025, doi: 10.4121/71317dee089c-4507-8f85-6a4718c4b8d7.
[18] H. Gu, R. Yu, Z. Li, X. Wang, and F. Zhou, “Esdi: Entanglement scheduling and distribution in the quantum
internet,” 2023 32nd International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN), pp. 1–10,
2023.
[19] A. Pirker and W. Dür, “A quantum network stack
and protocols for reliable entanglement-based networks,”
New Journal of Physics, vol. 21, no. 3, p. 033003,
2019, publisher: IOP Publishing. [Online]. Available:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/ab05f7
[20] M. Pompili, C. Delle Donne, I. te Raa, B. van der
Vecht, M. Skrzypczyk, G. Ferreira, L. de Kluijver,
A. J. Stolk, S. L. N. Hermans, P. Pawełczak,
W. Kozlowski, R. Hanson, and S. Wehner, “Experimental
demonstration of entanglement delivery using a quantum
network stack,” npj Quantum Information, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 1–10, Oct. 2022, number: 1 Publisher:
Nature Publishing Group. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41534-022-00631-2
[21] A. Dahlberg, M. Skrzypczyk, T. Coopmans, L. Wubben,
F. Rozpędek, M. Pompili, A. Stolk, P. Pawełczak,
R. Knegjens, J. d. O. Filho, R. Hanson, and
S. Wehner, “A Link Layer Protocol for Quantum
Networks,” in Proceedings of the ACM Special Interest
Group on Data Communication, Aug. 2019, pp. 159–
173, arXiv:1903.09778 [quant-ph]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.09778
[22] B. Davies, T. Beauchamp, G. Vardoyan, and S. Wehner,
“Tools for the analysis of quantum protocols requiring
state generation within a time window,” IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10417724/
[23] J. I. Naus, “Approximations for Distributions of
Scan Statistics,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, vol. 77, no. 377, pp. 177–183, 1982,
publisher: [American Statistical Association, Taylor &
Francis, Ltd.]. [Online]. Available: https://www.jstor.
org/stable/2287786
[24] J. Glaz, J. I. Naus, and S. Wallenstein, Scan statistics, ser.
Springer series in statistics. New York: Springer, 2001.
[25] M. Skrzypczyk and S. Wehner, “An Architecture for
Meeting Quality-of-Service Requirements in Multi-User
Quantum Networks,” Nov. 2021, arXiv:2111.13124 [quantph]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2111.13124
[26] C. Cicconetti, M. Conti, and A. Passarella, “Request
Scheduling in Quantum Networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Quantum Engineering, vol. 2, pp. 2–17, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9461156/
[27] R. Van Meter, R. Satoh, N. Benchasattabuse, T. Matsuo, M. Hajdušek, T. Satoh, S. Nagayama, and
S. Suzuki, “A Quantum Internet Architecture,” in
2022 IEEE International Conference on Quantum
Computing and Engineering (QCE), Sep. 2022, pp. 341–
352, arXiv:2112.07092 [quant-ph]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.07092

no. 10, p. 2081, 2019. [Online]. Available:
//www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/9/10/2081

[28] D. Kreutz, F. M. V. Ramos, P. E. Veríssimo, C. E. Rothenberg, S. Azodolmolky, and S. Uhlig, “Software-Defined
Networking: A Comprehensive Survey,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 14–76, Jan. 2015, conference
Name: Proceedings of the IEEE.

https:

[39] X. Wang, T. Chen, Y. Du, J. He, and C. Zhu,
“Network slicing-based and QoS-oriented software-defined
quantum key distribution network,” in 2023 International
Conference on Ubiquitous Communication (Ucom), 2023,
pp. 397–402. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/10257658

[29] N. McKeown, T. Anderson, H. Balakrishnan, G. Parulkar,
L. Peterson, J. Rexford, S. Shenker, and J. Turner,
“OpenFlow: enabling innovation in campus networks,”
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review,
vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 69–74, Mar. 2008. [Online]. Available:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1355734.1355746
[30] J. M. Halpern, R. HAAS, a. doria, L. Dong, W. Wang,
H. M. Khosravi, J. H. Salim, and R. Gopal, “Forwarding
and Control Element Separation (ForCES) Protocol
Specification,” Internet Engineering Task Force, Request
for Comments RFC 5810, Mar. 2010, num Pages:
124. [Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/
doc/rfc5810
[31] W. Kozlowski, F. Kuipers, and S. Wehner, “A p4
data plane for the quantum internet,” in Proceedings
of the 3rd P4 Workshop in Europe. ACM, 2020, pp.
49–51. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.
1145/3426744.3431321
[32] Z. Yang and C. Cui, “Reconfigurable Quantum Internet
Service Provider,” May 2023, arXiv:2305.09048 [quantph]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09048
[33] R. S. Tessinari, R. I. Woodward, and A. J. Shields,
“Software-defined quantum network using a QKDsecured SDN controller and encrypted messages,” May
2023, arXiv:2305.12893 [quant-ph]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12893
[34] V. Martin, J. P. Brito, L. Ortiz, R. B. Mendez,
J. S. Buruaga, R. J. Vicente, A. Sebastián-Lombraña,
D. Rincon, F. Perez, C. Sanchez, M. Peev, H. H.
Brunner, F. Fung, A. Poppe, F. Fröwis, A. J.
Shields, R. I. Woodward, H. Griesser, S. Roehrich,
F. De La Iglesia, C. Abellan, M. Hentschel, J. M.
Rivas-Moscoso, A. Pastor, J. Folgueira, and D. R.
Lopez, “MadQCI: a heterogeneous and scalable SDN
QKD network deployed in production facilities.” [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12791
[35] A. Aguado, V. Martin, D. Lopez, M. Peev, J. MartinezMateo, J. L. Rosales, F. de la Iglesia, M. Gomez,
E. Hugues Salas, A. Lord, R. Nejabati, and D. Simeonidou, “Quantum-aware software defined networks,” in
6th International Conference on Quantum Cryptography
(QCRYPT 2016). QCrypt, 2016.

[40] H. S. Hadi and A. J. Obaid, “Quantum key
distribution (QKD) for wireless networks with
software-defined
networking,”
Internet
Technology Letters, vol. n/a, p. e547, 2024, _eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/itl2.547.
[Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1002/itl2.547
[41] M. Iqbal, A. Villegas, M. S. Moreolo, L. Nadal,
R. Muñoz, P. Adillon, S. Sarmiento, J. Tabares,
and S. Etcheverry, “SDN-enabled continuous-variable
QKD in coexistence with 8×200 gb/s 16-QAM classical
channels,” in 2024 International Conference on Optical
Network Design and Modeling (ONDM), 2024, pp.
1–3. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/10582669/authors#authors
[42] S. Gupta, I. Agarwal, V. Mogiligidda, R. Kumar Krishnan, S. Chennuri, D. Aggarwal, A. Hoodati, S. Cooper,
Ranjan, M. Bilal Sheik, K. M. Bhavya, M. Hegde,
M. N. Krishna, A. K. Chauhan, M. Korrapati, S. Singh,
J. B. Singh, S. Sud, S. Gupta, S. Pant, Sankar,
N. Agrawal, A. Ranjan, P. Mohapatra, T. Roopak,
A. Ahmad, M. Nanjunda, and D. Singh, “ChaQra:
a cellular unit of the indian quantum network,” Scientific Reports, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 16752, 2024,
publisher: Nature Publishing Group. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-024-67495-8
[43] Quantum Key Distribution Industry Specification Group,
“Quantum key distribution (QKD): Control interface for
software defined networks,” European Telecommunications Standards Institute, Tech. Rep., 2024. [Online].
Available: https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/QKD/
001_099/015/02.01.01_60/gs_QKD015v020101p.pdf
[44] S. S. Craciunas and R. S. Oliver, “Combined task- and
network-level scheduling for distributed time-triggered
systems,” Real-Time Systems, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 161–200,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/s11241-015-9244-x
[45] H.
J.
Kramer,
“TTEthernet
(timetriggered
ethernet)
eoPortal,”
retrieved
from
https://www.eoportal.org/satellitemissions/ttethernet on 2023-10-30. [Online]. Available:
https://www.eoportal.org/satellite-missions/ttethernet

[36] W. Yu, B. Zhao, and Z. Yan, “Software defined quantum
key distribution network,” in 2017 3rd IEEE International
Conference on Computer and Communications (ICCC).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1293–1297. [Online]. Available: http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8322751/
[37] A. Aguado, E. Hugues-Salas, P. A. Haigh, J. Marhuenda,
A. B. Price, P. Sibson, J. E. Kennard, C. Erven, J. G.
Rarity, M. G. Thompson, A. Lord, R. Nejabati, and
D. Simeonidou, “Secure NFV orchestration over an SDNcontrolled optical network with time-shared quantum key
distribution resources,” Journal of Lightwave Technology,
vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1357–1362, 2017.
[38] H. Wang, Y. Zhao, and A. Nag, “Quantum-keydistribution (QKD) networks enabled by softwaredefined networks (SDN),” Applied Sciences, vol. 9,

[46] TTTech, “NASA’s orion spacecraft,” retrieved from:
https://www.tttech.com/aerospace/resources/casestudies/nasa-orion on 2023-10-30. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tttech.com/aerospace/resources/
case-studies/nasa-orion
[47] M. Ruf, N. H. Wan, H. Choi, D. Englund, and
R. Hanson, “Quantum networks based on color centers
in diamond,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 130,
no. 7, p. 070901, Aug. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0056534
[48] M. Pompili, S. L. N. Hermans, S. Baier, H. K. C.
Beukers, P. C. Humphreys, R. N. Schouten, R. F. L.

23

Vermeulen, M. J. Tiggelman, L. dos Santos Martins,
B. Dirkse, S. Wehner, and R. Hanson, “Realization
of a multinode quantum network of remote solidstate qubits,” Science, vol. 372, no. 6539, pp. 259–
264, Apr. 2021, publisher:
American Association
for the Advancement of Science. [Online]. Available:
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abg1919
[49] V. Krutyanskiy, M. Galli, V. Krcmarsky, S. Baier,
D. A. Fioretto, Y. Pu, A. Mazloom, P. Sekatski,
M. Canteri, M. Teller, J. Schupp, J. Bate, M. Meraner,
N. Sangouard, B. P. Lanyon, and T. E. Northup,
“Entanglement of trapped-ion qubits separated by 230
meters,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 130, p. 050803, Feb.
2023. [Online]. Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevLett.130.050803
[50] P. Maunz, D. L. Moehring, S. Olmschenk, K. C. Younge,
D. N. Matsukevich, and C. Monroe, “Quantum interference of photon pairs from two remote trapped atomic
ions,” Nature Physics, vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 538–541, 2007.
[51] J. P. Covey, H. Weinfurter, and H. Bernien, “Quantum
networks with neutral atom processing nodes,” npj
Quantum Information, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Sep.
2023, number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41534-023-00759-9
[52] M. Uphoff, M. Brekenfeld, G. Rempe, and S. Ritter,
“An integrated quantum repeater at telecom wavelength
with single atoms in optical fiber cavities,” Applied
Physics B, vol. 122, no. 3, Mar. 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00340-015-6299-2
[53] C. W. Chou, H. de Riedmatten, D. Felinto, S. V. Polyakov,
S. J. van Enk, and H. J. Kimble, “Measurement-induced
entanglement for excitation stored in remote atomic ensembles,” Nature, vol. 438, no. 7069, pp. 828–832, Dec.
2005.
[54] C. W. Chou, J. Laurat, H. Deng, K. S. Choi,
H. de Riedmatten, D. Felinto, and H. J. Kimble,
“Functional quantum nodes for entanglement distribution
over scalable quantum networks,” Science, vol. 316, no.
5829, pp. 1316–1320, Jun. 2007. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1140300
[55] P. Drmota, D. Nadlinger, D. Main, B. Nichol, E. Ainley,
D. Leichtle, A. Mantri, E. Kashefi, R. Srinivas,
G. Araneda, C. Ballance, and D. Lucas, “Verifiable
blind quantum computing with trapped ions and single
photons,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 132, no. 15,
Apr. 2024. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevLett.132.150604
[56] R. C. Berrevoets, T. Middelburg, R. F. L. Vermeulen,
L. D. Chiesa, F. Broggi, S. Piciaccia, R. Pluis,
P. Umesh, J. F. Marques, W. Tittel, and J. A. Slater,
“Deployed measurement-device independent quantum key
distribution and bell-state measurements coexisting with
standard internet data and networking equipment,” Communications Physics, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 186, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-022-00964-6
[57] G. Vardoyan, S. Guha, P. Nain, and D. Towsley, “On the
Stochastic Analysis of a Quantum Entanglement Distribution Switch,” IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering, vol. 2, pp. 1–16, 2021.
[58] ——, “On the exact analysis of an idealized quantum
switch,” Performance Evaluation, vol. 144, p. 102141,
2020.

24

[59] N. K. Panigrahy, T. Vasantam, D. Towsley, and L. Tassiulas, “On the capacity region of a quantum switch with entanglement purification,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2023-IEEE
Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2023,
pp. 1–10.
[60] S. Gauthier, G. Vardoyan, and S. Wehner, “An architecture for control of entanglement generation switches in
quantum networks,” IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering, vol. 4, pp. 1–17, 2023.
[61] S. Gauthier, T. Vasantam, and G. Vardoyan, “An
on-demand resource allocation algorithm for a quantum
network hub and its performance analysis,” 2024. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18066
[62] L.-M. Duan, M. D. Lukin, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller, “Longdistance quantum communication with atomic ensembles
and linear optics,” Nature, vol. 414, no. 6862, pp. 413–418,
Nov. 2001.
[63] C. Simon, H. de Riedmatten, M. Afzelius, N. Sangouard,
H. Zbinden, and N. Gisin, “Quantum Repeaters with Photon Pair Sources and Multimode Memories,” Phys. Rev.
Lett., vol. 98, p. 190503, May 2007.
[64] N. Sangouard, C. Simon, H. de Riedmatten, and N. Gisin,
“Quantum repeaters based on atomic ensembles and linear
optics,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 83, pp. 33–80, Mar 2011.
[65] N. Sangouard, R. Dubessy, and C. Simon, “Quantum
repeaters based on single trapped ions,” Phys. Rev. A,
vol. 79, p. 042340, Apr 2009.
[66] S. Maiti, G. Avis, S. Kar, and S. Wehner, “Interfacing
atomic ensemble repeaters and ion trap nodes for intercity
quantum networks,” In preparation and private communication, 2024.
[67] L. Kamin, E. Shchukin, F. Schmidt, and P. van Loock,
“Exact rate analysis for quantum repeaters with imperfect
memories and entanglement swapping as soon as possible.”
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.10318
[68] H. Zimmermann, “Osi reference model - the iso model
of architecture for open systems interconnection,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 425–
432, 1980.
[69] C. D. Donne, M. Iuliano, B. van der Vecht, G. M.
Ferreira, H. Jirovská, T. van der Steenhoven, A. Dahlberg,
M. Skrzypczyk, D. Fioretto, M. Teller, P. Filippov, A. R.P. Montblanch, J. Fischer, B. van Ommen, N. Demetriou,
D. Leichtle, L. Music, H. Ollivier, I. t. Raa, W. Kozlowski,
T. Taminiau, P. Pawełczak, T. Northup, R. Hanson, and
S. Wehner, “Design and demonstration of an operating
system for executing applications on quantum network
nodes,” Jul. 2024, arXiv:2407.18306 [quant-ph]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18306
[70] H. Bernien, B. Hensen, W. Pfaff, G. Koolstra, M. S.
Blok, L. Robledo, T. H. Taminiau, M. Markham, D. J.
Twitchen, L. Childress, and R. Hanson, “Heralded entanglement between solid-state qubits separated by three metres,” Nature, vol. 497, no. 7447, pp. 86–90, Apr. 2013.
[71] P. C. Humphreys, N. Kalb, J. P. J. Morits, R. N.
Schouten, R. F. L. Vermeulen, D. J. Twitchen,
M. Markham, and R. Hanson, “Deterministic delivery
of remote entanglement on a quantum network,”
Nature, vol. 558, no. 7709, pp. 268–273, Jun. 2018,
arXiv:1712.07567 [quant-ph]. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1712.07567

[72] T. van Leent, M. Bock, F. Fertig, R. Garthoff, S. Eppelt,
Y. Zhou, P. Malik, M. Seubert, T. Bauer, W. Rosenfeld,
W. Zhang, C. Becher, and H. Weinfurter, “Entangling single atoms over 33 km telecom fibre,” Nature, vol. 607, no.
7917, pp. 69–73, Jul. 2022.

[85] M. Pant, H. Krovi, D. Towsley, L. Tassiulas, L. Jiang,
P. Basu, D. Englund, and S. Guha, “Routing entanglement
in the quantum internet,” npj Quantum Information,
vol. 5, no. 1, p. 25, Dec. 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://www.nature.com/articles/s41534-019-0139-x

[73] N. Joukov, A. Traeger, R. Iyer, C. P. Wright, and
E. Zadok, “Operating system profiling via latency analysis,” in Proceedings of the 7th Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation, ser. OSDI ’06. USA:
USENIX Association, 2006, p. 89–102.

[86] R. Van Meter, T. Satoh, T. D. Ladd, W. J. Munro,
and K. Nemoto, “Path Selection for Quantum Repeater
Networks,” Networking Science, vol. 3, no. 1-4, pp.
82–95, Dec. 2013, arXiv:1206.5655 [quant-ph]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1206.5655

[74] A. S. Tanenbaum, Modern Operating Systems, 2nd ed.
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall PTR, 2001.

[87] J. A. Stankovic, M. Spuri, G. C. Buttazzo, and
K. Ramamritham, Deadline scheduling for real-time
systems: EDF and related algorithms, ser. The Kluwer
international series in engineering and computer science.
New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dec. 1999,
no. SECS 460. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S089812219991235X

[75] G. C. Buttazzo, Hard Real-Time Computing Systems: Predictable Scheduling Algorithms and Applications,
3rd ed. New York, NY, USA: Springer Science + Business
Media, 2011.
[76] S. Shenker, “Fundamental design issues for the future Internet,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1176–1188, Sep. 1995, conference
Name: IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications.
[77] A. Furusawa, J. L. Sørensen, S. L. Braunstein,
C. A. Fuchs, H. J. Kimble, and E. S. Polzik,
“Unconditional quantum teleportation,” Science, vol. 282,
no. 5389, pp. 706–709, 1998. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.282.5389.706
[78] M. D. Barrett, J. Chiaverini, T. Schaetz, J. Britton, W. M.
Itano, J. D. Jost, E. Knill, C. Langer, D. Leibfried, R. Ozeri, and D. J. Wineland, “Deterministic quantum teleportation of atomic qubits,” Nature, vol. 429, pp. 737–739,
2004.
[79] D. Leichtle, L. Music, E. Kashefi, and H. Ollivier,
“Verifying BQP Computations on Noisy Devices with
Minimal Overhead,” Sep. 2021, arXiv:2109.04042 [quantph]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.04042
[80] F. B. Talbot, “Resource-Constrained Project Scheduling
with Time-Resource Tradeoffs: The Nonpreemptive
Case,” Management Science, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 1197–
1210, 1982, publisher: INFORMS. [Online]. Available:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2630948
[81] H. Jirovská, “Evaluating an RCPSP Implementation
of Quantum Program Scheduling,” Master’s thesis,
Technische Universiteit Delft, Delft, Jun. 2023. [Online].
Available: https://repository.tudelft.nl/islandora/object/
uuid%3A6abe7dc4-0308-490e-b156-eed07426e129
[82] A. Green, J. Lawrence, G. Siopsis, N. A. Peters,
and A. Passian, “Quantum key distribution for critical
infrastructures: Towards cyber-physical security for
hydropower and dams,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 24, p.
9818, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/
1424-8220/23/24/9818
[83] M. Alshowkan, P. G. Evans, M. Starke, D. Earl, and N. A.
Peters, “Authentication of smart grid communications
using quantum key distribution,” Scientific Reports,
vol. 12, no. 1, p. 12731, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-16090-w
[84] S. Aggarwal and G. Kaddoum, “Authentication of
smart grid by integrating QKD and blockchain in
SCADA systems,” IEEE Transactions on Network and
Service Management, pp. 1–1, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10591785/

25

[88] C. L. Liu and J. W. Layland, “Scheduling Algorithms for
Multiprogramming in a Hard-Real-Time Environment,”
Journal of the ACM, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 46–61, Jan.
1973. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.
1145/321738.321743
[89] S. Low and D. Lapsley, “Optimization flow control. i. basic
algorithm and convergence,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 861–874, 1999.
[90] K. Steenhaut, K. Degieter, W. Brissinck, and E. Dirkx,
“Scheduling and admission control policies: A case
study for ATM,” Computer Networks and ISDN Systems,
vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 539–554, 1997. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0169755296001183
[91] J. H. Saltzer, D. P. Reed, and D. D. Clark, “End-toend arguments in system design,” ACM Transactions
on Computer Systems, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 277–288,
1984. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.
1145/357401.357402
[92] W. Hoeffding, “Probability inequalities for sums of
bounded random variables,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, vol. 58, no. 301, pp. 13–30,
1963. [Online]. Available: http://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/abs/10.1080/01621459.1963.10500830
[93] R. F. Werner, “Quantum states with Einstein-PodolskyRosen correlations admitting a hidden variable model,”
Physical Review A, vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 4277–4281, Oct.
1989. [Online]. Available: http://www2.fisica.unlp.edu.
ar/materias/qc/Sp.pdf

Contents
Introduction
Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
2

II

Background
II.i
Network Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II.ii Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2
2
2

III

Design Considerations
III.i Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III.i.a Devices and Components . . . . . . .
III.i.b Hardware Agnosticism . . . . . . . .
III.i.c SDN Controller . . . . . . . . . . . .
III.i.d Device Autonomy . . . . . . . . . . .
III.i.e Protocols for generating entanglement
III.i.f Network Stack . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III.i.g Network Capabilities . . . . . . . . .
III.i.h Timing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III.ii Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III.ii.a Execution Environment . . . . . . . .
III.ii.b Application Classes . . . . . . . . . .
III.ii.c Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III.ii.d Knowledge of the network . . . . . .

3
3
3
3
3
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
6
6
6

Network Architecture
IV.i Periodic Computation and Distribution of
Schedules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.ii Application Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.ii.a Executing Application Instances and
Obtaining Minimal Service . . . . . .
IV.iii Demand Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.iii.a Packets of Entanglement . . . . . . .
IV.iii.b Timing Constraints . . . . . . . . . .
IV.iii.c Full Demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.iv Network Capabilities Update . . . . . . . . .
IV.v Capability Negotiation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.vi Demand Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.vi.a Leaving the Demand Queue . . . . .
IV.vii Session Initialisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.viiiProcessing Demands and Packet Generation
Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.viii.aFinite Execution Times . . . . . . . .
IV.viii.bSetting the rate of packet generation
attempts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.viii.cAdditional Information . . . . . . . .
IV.viii.dComplete Packet Generation Task . .
IV.ix Network Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.ix.a Scheduler Admission Control . . . . .
IV.ix.b Computing the Network Schedule . .
IV.x Distributing the Network Schedule . . . . . .

6

12
12
12
13
13
13
13

Implementation
V.i
Service Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V.ii Network Capability Update . . . . . . . . . .
V.iii Capability Negotiation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V.iv Demand Registration and Queuing . . . . . .
V.v Creating Packet Generation Tasks . . . . . .
V.vi Network Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V.vi.a Admission of New Demands . . . . .
V.vi.b Computing the Network Schedule . .
V.vii End Node Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14
14
14
14
14
14
15
15
15
16

Evaluation
VI.i Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16
16

I
I.i

IV

V

VI

6
7
7
8
8
9
9
9
10
10
10
10

VI.ii Network Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
VI.iii Admission Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
VI.iii.a Utilisation Bound . . . . . . . . . . .
17
VI.iii.b Schedule Computation Time . . . . .
17
VI.iv Session Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
VI.iv.a Creation time . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
VI.iv.b Contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
VI.iv.c Peer-to-Peer vs Client-Server . . . . .
18
VI.iv.d Termination of Demands . . . . . . .
18
VI.v Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
VI.v.a Facilitation of obtaining minimal service 18
VI.v.b Admission Control Requirements . .
19
VI.v.c Controls on Requesting Adaptive Rates 19
VI.v.d Best Fixed Rate for Nodes to Request 20
VII Conclusions and Future Work

21

VIII Acknowledgements

21

A

B

Notation

30

C

Who knows what
C.I
Central Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C.II Nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31
31
31

D

Code
D.I
Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31
31

E

Methods for creating Packet Generation Tasks 31
E.I
Approximations from Naus ’82 for determining the length of PGAs . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
E.I.a
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
E.I.b
result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
E.I.c
Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
E.II Calculating Minimum Rate using Hoeffding’s
inequality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32

F

Additional Evaluation details
33
F.I
Entanglement Generation Model . . . . . . .
33
F.I.a
Werner States . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
F.I.b
Entanglement Generation . . . . . . .
33
F.II Choice of cap on number of PGAs per schedule 33
F.III Choice of Expiry times and Rates . . . . . . .
33
F.IV Scheduler Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
F.V Qoala files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
F.V.a
Measure Directly Application (MDA) .
35
F.V.b
Create and Keep Application (CKA) .
36
F.VI Sensitivity to parameters . . . . . . . . . . .
38
F.VI.a Dummy Network Scheduler . . . . . .
38
F.VII Calculating the expected queuing time . . . .
38

10
11

26

Further Discussion about Architecture
28
A.I
Discussion of time-step induced issues . . . .
28
A.I.a
Periodicity of entanglement generation attempts . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
A.I.b
Alignment between network and nodes 28
A.II Performance Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
A.III The End-to-End Principle . . . . . . . . . . .
28

List of Definitions
IV.1 (Application Session) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.2 (Application Instance Execution) . . . . . . .
IV.3 (Successful Quantum Block Execution) . . . .
IV.4 (Successful Application Instance Execution) .

7
8
8
8

IV.5 (Quantum Successful Execution) . . . . . . . .
IV.6 (Minimal Service) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.7 (Window) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.8 (Entanglement Packet) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.9 (Packet Suitability) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.10(Realisation of a demand) . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.11(Packet Generation Task) . . . . . . . . . . . .
V.1 (Eligibility for scheduling of a PGA) . . . . . .
VI.1 (Termination of a Session) . . . . . . . . . . .
VI.2 (Expiry of a session) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8
8
8
8
9
12
12
15
16
16

List of Algorithms
1
2
3
4
5

Determining ppacket . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Determining the length of PGAs . . . . . . . . .
Determining the minimum rate of PGAs . . . .
Network Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
EDF Scheduling Algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . .

11
12
12
13
16

List of Figures
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Example of a Quantum Network. . . . . . . . .
4
Example of an entanglement generation protocol. 4
Flow of information through the stages of the
architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
Example of the timings for computing, distributing and executing the kth network schedule. 7
Interaction Diagram for our proposed quantum
network architecture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Excerpt from an example network schedule
with two PGTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Example of a star-topology network with 6 nodes. 16
Results from simulations for peer-to-peer MDA
on a six-node star network. . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Results from simulations for client-server CKA
on a six-node star network. . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Times taken for our computational server to
compute the network schedule. . . . . . . . . .
34

List of Tables
1
2
3

Table of entities (sources) and the parameters
they provide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Network Parameters for Evaluation . . . . . .
Scheduler Parameters for Evaluation . . . . . .

14
17
17

27

Appendices
A.
A.I.
A.I.a.

Further Discussion about Architecture

Discussion of time-step induced issues
Periodicity of entanglement generation attempts

There are a few issues which may arise from the fact that entanglement generation can be a periodic process. For
instance, if the duration of a PGA is not a multiple of this period, then the node will not be able to exactly match what
the network has scheduled, perhaps even leading to de-synchronisation. In order to mitigate this, we propose that the
end nodes should only do entanglement generation during times within the allocated time periods. In particular, this
means that if they would exceed the end of a PGA with a given entanglement generation attempt, it should not be
carried out unless the node is immediately starting another PGA.
To show that this is not detrimental to performance, we consider two scenarios differentiated by when packet
generation succeeds within a PGA. If a packet (w, s, F ) is created before the final attempt, then we expect that the
end nodes will immediately begin executing local operations. In this case, it is irrelevant at what time the final
scheduled attempt to generate entanglement would have been, as a packet has already been generated. Suppose
instead a packet has not been generated before the final scheduled attempt. In this case, as each attempt to generate
an entangled link has a very low probability to succeed, loosing a single attempt at creating a link will not have a
material impact on the overall expected performance of a PGA.
A.I.b.

Alignment between network and nodes

There may also be situations where the node operates on its own time-slotted schedule where the start of a PGA does
not align with the start of a time slot at the node. In this case again we expect that the node would execute the PGA
within the local time slots which fall within the allocated times.
This could be mitigated by ensuring that the network scheduling algorithm schedules start times in such a way that
they coincide with local time slots. However, this would require both that the nodes communicate such information
to the central controller, as well as a level of synchronisation beyond what is reasonable above the physical level of the
network.
A.II.

Performance Limitations

The utilisation bound and the choice of scheduling interval are two potential sources of limitations on the performance
of our scheduled. The utilisation limit is inherent; any architecture will never be able to extract more than a utilisation
of 1 out of any resource, so this will always be a limitation in any network architecture.
On the other hand, the choice of the scheduling interval can impact performance in two separate ways. Firstly, if
the deployed scheduler is too computationally complex, then in order to ensure that the schedule is distributed on
time, we will need to limit how many demands or PGAs are included in a given schedule. This means fewer demands
can be served in a given schedule, therevy reducing performance. This effect will become more apparent for shorter
scheduling intervals, so this can be mitigated by extending the scheduling interval.
However, extending the scheduling interval may impact the performance elsewhere. In particular, if the scheduling
interval it too long with respect to the value of tmax duration for a given class of demands, then the inherent latency will
greatly decrease the performance of such demands.
Therefore, the choice of the length of the scheduling interval needs to be made carefully, considering typical demands
on the network and the complexity of the selected scheduler to avoid limiting the performance which can be extracted
from the network architecture.
A.III.

The End-to-End Principle

In classical networking, a good principle to adhere to when designing network architectures is the so-called end-to-end
principle, where any process required to ensure the correctness of a network application is performed by the end
users and not by the network [91]. In the context of a quantum network, one could interpret this as meaning that
the network should not take steps to ensure that entangled links are generated sufficiently close together, nor ensure
that at least some minimum number of instances of the application are executed. However, we would appear to be
violating this by including packets in the demand, and allowing nodes to submit a request for a variable rate of packet
generation.
With regards to adaptive rate requests, the network does take some responsibility for ensuring that there are enough
PGAs to give the session a probability 1 − εservice of obtaining minimal service and executing at least Ninst instances.
28

However, as the required rate is calculated when the demand is accepted for scheduling rather than based on what
happens when the schedule is executed, there is no need for extra communication or processing to facilitate this.
Furthermore, given that it will often take many scheduling intervals for a given session to obtain minimal service,
it may be advantageous for the network to ensure that sessions obtain minimal service if they get any service. In
particular, this would avoid the scenario where a session misses minimal service by a couple of instances. Such a
scenario results in a lot of wasted time in both the network schedule and node schedules because the demand will
require re-submission and one or more previous PGAs may have used time in both network and node schedules that
could have been otherwise allocated to other demands.
To justify the inclusion of packets of entanglement in the demand, recall that we wish to compute network schedules
in an a priori manner, in order to allow the node schedulers to take them as an input. In order to create efficient
and effective schedules, however, the network does need to know about what packet of entanglement is being created,
in particular to ensure that any scheduled PGAs have a sufficient duration. Furthermore, as the central controller
doesn’t get any information from the nodes/network as the schedule is executed, the network does not undertake
any additional checks, e.g. determining whether or not a packet was actually generated. This means that including
packets in the demand results in an increase in network performance without encumbering the central controller with
additional tasks. Additionally, the responsibility still lies with the nodes to adhere to the packet form they requested,
rather than being enforced by the central controller.
Therefore, by permitting packets and adaptive rates of packet generation. the additional responsibilities of the
network are minimal, and each has the potential to increase the overall performance of the network.

29

B.

Notation

Notation used throughout this paper. Entries which fall into multiple categories are only shown once.

Symbol
S
N
App
Ninst
texpiry
p
w
s
F
D
R
tminsep
τ
τi,j
E
Rattempt
ρ
TSI
εservice
ppacket
pgen
tsubmit
tmax duration
MDA
CKA
T
σ
ri,j
di,j
si,j
ci,j
t∗
Uτ
Ur
Û
αC
T

Definition
Application Sessions
Application session
Set of nodes in the network
placeholder for a quantum application
Minimum number of application instances required for minimal service
Expiry time of an application session/demand/packet generation task
Packets of Entanglement
packet of entanglement
time window of packet
number of pairs in a packet
(average) minimum fidelity of links generated as part of a packet
Demands
Network Demand
Requested rate of packet generation
Minimum time between two packet generation attempts
Packet Generation Tasks
Packet generation task (PGT)
The jth packet generation attempt (PGA) stemming from PGT τ
Execution time of a PGA
(Minimum) rate at which PGAs should be scheduled
Resources required to execute a PGA.
Network Schedules
Duration of the scheduling interval
Evaluation
Probability that a session does not obtain minimal service
Probability that a packet is generated in a given PGA
Probability that an attempt to create a single entangled link succeeds
Time at which a demand is received by the central controller
Maximum duration of an application session. Used for dynamically setting expiry times.
Applications
Measure Directly Application, based on QKD
Create and Keep Application, based on BQC
EDF Scheduler
(Effective) period of a PGT
Offset from t = 0 of a PGT
release time of PGA j from PGT i
deadline of PGA j from PGT i
start time of PGA j from PGT i
completion time of PGA j from PGT i
scheduler decision time
Admission Control
Utilisation of PGT τ
utilisation of resource r
Utilisation bound
Proportion of the scheduling interval allocated to compute the network schedule within.
Set of PGTs from which PGAs should be scheduled in the next network schedule.
30

C.
C.I.

Who knows what

Central Controller
Knows
Probability of PGA failure εpacket = 1 − ppacket
Network topology
Network traffic
EGPs available on the network
Capabilities of internal components e.g. repeater chains.

C.II.

Nodes

Knows
Local hardware capabilities
Local utilisation
Application program(s) [Number of pairs required, local gates]
If an instance executes (successfully)
Identity of nearest neighbour & metro hub

D.
D.I.

Dataset
20240709-1100

9

20240711-100

E.

E.I.a.

Doesn’t know
Full network topology
Network traffic
EGPs on network
εpacket (up to empirical deductions)
Application sessions being run on other nodes

Code

Figures

Figure Number
8

E.I.

Doesn’t know
If a PGA is/was successful
What application(s) are being run

UUID
01379bb0-f27b-4e88-8ee1cfb739703615
6d415ef2-f092-440c-850d2d1c50f08640

Script
combined_plotting.py
combined_plotting.py

Methods for creating Packet Generation Tasks

Approximations from Naus ’82 for determining the length of PGAs
Motivation

When determining how long a PGA should be, we need to be able to calculate the probability of a packet of entanglement being generated in some timeframe consisting of a known number of trials. This is precisely the sort of problem
which is addressed in the field of scan statistics, which is dedicated to looking at the probability that random events
are grouped together [24]. In particular, the process of generating a packet is equivalent to the generalised birthday
problem, which looks at the probability of getting k events (or successes) in a window of size m. Exact formulae as
well as approximations exist to calculate these probabilities, we use the one in the following section which is due to
Naus [23].
E.I.b.

result

The following theorem and discussion is due to Naus [23]:
Theorem 1. Let Tk,m be the time at which we first observe k events in a window of size m. Then if we write
P ′ (k|m, N, p) = P[Tk,m < N ]
= 1 − Q′ (k|m; N ; p),
and abbreviate Q′ (k|m; Lm; p) as Q′L , then
Q′L ≈ Q′2



Q′3
Q′2

31

N
m
−2

(11)

Naus also gives formulae for calculating Q′2 and Q′3 exactly:
Let
 
Pr
m k
m−k
i=0 b(i; s; p) r = 0, 1, ..., s .
b(k; m, p) =
p (1 − p)
,
Fb (r; s, p) =
0
r<0
k
Then for 2 < k < N , 0 < p < 1, we have
2

Q′2 = (Fp (k − 1; m, p)) − (k − 1)b(k; m, p)Fb (k − 2; m, p) + mpb(k; m, p)Fb (k − 3; m − 1, p)

(12)

3

(13)

and

Q′3 = (Fb (k − 1, m, p)) − A1 + A2 + A3 − A4

where


A1 = 2b(k; m, p)Fb (k − 1; m, p) (k − 1)Fb (k − 2; m, p) − mpFb (k − 3; m − 1, p)

1 2
b (k − 1)(k − 2)Fb (k − 3; m, p) − 2(k − 2)mpFb (k − 4; m − 1, p) + m(m − 1)p2 Fb (k − 5; m − 2, p)
2 k
k−1
X
A3 =
b2k−r Fb2 (r − 1; m, p)

A2 =

r=1

A4 =

k−1
X

b2k−r br ((r − 1)Fb (r − 2; m, p) − mpFb (r − 3; m − 1, p))

r=2

E.I.c.

Impact

Given this approximation, we can calculate the probability that a packet is produced in a PGA of length N timesteps.
From here, we can use a method such as interval bisection to calculate the length of PGA required to exceed the
desired value of ppacket .
One implication of using this method for calculating the length of PGAs is the scaling with regards to different
parameters. In particular, if we tighten the window or increase the value of ppacket , then the required length of the
PGA grows rapidly, much faster than the value of Rattempt decreases.
E.II.

Calculating Minimum Rate using Hoeffding’s inequality.

Let packet generation attempts occur at rate R, and succeed with probability p. Let the session have an acceptable
probability of failure of at most εservice ≪ 1, an expiry time of texpiry and require Ninst instances to be successfully
executed to obtain minimal service. Let N = R × texpiry , and let Ninst = αN . Let SN be the number of successfully
executed instances.
iid
d PN
Let (Xi )N
i=1 ∼ Bernoulli(p). Then SN =
i=1 Xi . Then
P[not minimal service] = P[SN < Ninst ]

(14)

= P[E[SN ] − SN > E[SN ] − Ninst ]

(15)

= P[pN − SN > N (p − α)]

(16)

2

≤ exp(−2N (p − α) )
where the last inequality is by Hoeffding’s inequality [92].
The minimum number of packet generation attempts required is then given by

min N | εservice > exp(−2N (p − α)2 ) ∧ N > Ninst
from which we can then recover the minimum rate.

32

(17)

(18)

F.
F.I.
F.I.a.

Additional Evaluation details

Entanglement Generation Model
Werner States

We assume that all generated links are Werner states [93], and can be written in the format
ρ=

1−F
4F − 1
I2 +
|ψ⟩⟨ψ|.
3
3

where
|ψ⟩ =

(19)

|00⟩ + |11⟩
2

and F , the fidelity of ρ, is fixed.
The precise values we use are given in Table 2.
F.I.b.

Entanglement Generation

For our model, we assume that there are network-wide timeslots, at the end of which an entangled link between the
outer nodes and the central junction node is generated with known probability at a given fidelity. These are then
instantaneously and deterministically swapped, if possible, to create the desired end-to-end entangled links. We also
assume that the central node has no memories, and so it cannot store links for longer than one time-slot.
This means that there is only one possible scheme for generating end-to-end links, which is used by all pairs of
nodes.
We also assume that all links are homogeneous, in particular that they all produce links of the same average fidelity.
F.II.

Choice of cap on number of PGAs per schedule

To be able to estimate a suitable choice of cap on the number of PGAs per schedule, we computed 1125 network
schedules. This was achieved by running the same simulation used for the evaluation, without a cap on the number
of PGAs per schedule, and recording the number of PGAs which were scheduled and the time each schedule took
to compute. We used the QKD application with requested packet rates of R ∈ {1.0, 1.1, 1.5} and renewal rates
λ ∈ {0.001, 0.0015, 0.002}. Each simulation lasted 7800 simulated seconds, for a total of 25 schedules computed in
each simulation. We repeated each simulation 5 times.
Our implementation of the scheduling algorithm has complexity O(N 2 ) where N is the number of PGAs to be
scheduled. We therefore fitted a quadratic curve to the data and used this to obtain an estimate of the maximum
number of PGAs which could be scheduled in under 150s (half the scheduling period). This can be seen in Figure 10.
From this we obtained an estimate of 1397, which we then rounded up to 1500 for neatness. This was done in part as
we still had some uncertainty about the performance of the server whilst performing these simulations. In particular
on other hardware we observed lower computational times, in which case the cap would be greater. Furthermore, in
the MDA simulations, each PGT typically contributes between 150 and 300 PGAs to a schedule, and so increasing the
cap by less than 150 will not allow more demands to be accepted from the queue.
F.III.

Choice of Expiry times and Rates

Using the method in E.II, we find that to have εservice = 10−5 , 850 PGAs should be scheduled. Therefore, we choose
the rates to simulate such that at least 850 PGAs can be scheduled within tmax duration −TSI where TSI is the scheduling
interval.
In particular, we choose to simulate the end nodes requesting:
• An adaptive rate (R = 0).
• Fixed rates of:
– Approximately the minimum rate required for 850 PGAs to be scheduled in tmax duration , Rεmin
.
service
– approximately 2Rεmin
service
We choose to look at demands requesting a fixed packet generation rate of Rεmin
, as it serves as a good comparison
service
to the adaptive rate (which would use this rate in the absence of queuing). The choice of 2Rεmin
gives us a motivated
service
choice of a higher rate which we can compare against to see the impact of the choice of R on the performance metrics.
To choose the values of tmax duration , we look to the utilisation of the resulting PGTs when requesting the lowest
fixed rate, Rεmin
. As there are only 6 nodes in the network, if we choose a value of tmax duration sufficiently long
service
33

Figure 10: Times taken for our computational server to compute network schedules. The server has an Intel® Xeon®
Gold 6230 CPU, with each core running at a maximum clock speed of 3.9GHz, and 189GB of random access memory.
Each simulation was run on a single core, with up to 40 simulations being run in parallel. The regression modelling
was performed using the numpy Python module

34

that the minimum rate gives a utilisation less than Û/5, then all demands will always be immediately accepted and
everyone will get minimal service almost surely. Likewise, if we set the value of tmax duration too short, then only a
couple of demands will be serviceable at a time without violating either SAC1 or SAC2, due to the high utilisation
required. In a given deployment, we would expect that this is not desirable behaviour, and so such demands would
be predominantly filtered out by the demand registration. Therefore, we choose the values of tmax duration such that
the utilisation of tasks requesting the slowest fixed rate is approximately 0.2, as then almost all demands can be
satisfied simultaneously whilst the demand queue can still exert some influence over the performance of the network.
CKA
MDA
We therefore choose tMDA
max duration = 2100s and tmax duration = 4 days. Note that with a scheduling interval TSI = 300s,
MDA
the choice of tmax duration = 2100s results in an effective schedulable time of half an hour. For both MDA and CKA, we
see the same trends for different values of tmax duration whilst the same pressures from Û and the PGA cap exist.
F.IV.

Scheduler Model

We use the network scheduler as described in V.vi, with a scheduling interval of 300 seconds for the MDA simulations
and 3600 seconds (1 hour) for the CKA simulations. We take a longer scheduling interval for the CKA simulations as
these demands last for much longer to serve than the MDA demands. Subsequently, this means that sessions are renewed
on a much longer timescale and so the network state (schedule and demand queue) changes on a longer time scale.
F.V.
F.V.a.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

Qoala files
Measure Directly Application (MDA)

META_START
name : alice
parameters : bob_id
csockets : 0 -> bob
epr_sockets : 0 -> bob
META_END
^ b1 { type = QC }:
tuple < m0 > = run_request ( tuple < >) : req
^ b2 { type = CL }:
return_result ( m0 )

REQUEST req
callback_type : wait_all
callback :
return_vars : m0
remote_id : { bob_id }
epr_socket_id : 0
num_pairs : 1
virt_ids : all 0
timeout : 1000
fidelity : 1.0
typ : m e a s u r e _ d i r e c t l y
role : create

Listing 1: Qoala file for Alice
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

META_START
name : alice
parameters : bob_id
csockets : 0 -> bob
epr_sockets : 0 -> bob
META_END
^ b1 { type = QC }:
tuple < m0 > = run_request ( tuple < >) : req
^ b2 { type = CL }:
return_result ( m0 )

REQUEST req
callback_type : wait_all
callback :
return_vars : m0
remote_id : { bob_id }

35

20
21
22
23
24
25
26

epr_socket_id : 0
num_pairs : 1
virt_ids : all 0
timeout : 1000
fidelity : 1.0
typ : m e a s u r e _ d i r e c t l y
role : create

Listing 2: Qoala file for Bob
F.V.b.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63

Create and Keep Application (CKA)

META_START
name : client
parameters : server_id , alpha , beta , theta1 , theta2
csockets : 0 -> server
epr_sockets : 0 -> server
META_END
^ b0 { type = CL }:
csocket = assign_cval () : 0
^ b1 { type = QC }:
run_request ( tuple < >) : req0
^ b2 { type = QL }:
tuple < p2 > = run_su brouti ne ( tuple < theta2 >) : post_epr_0
^ b3 { type = QL }:
tuple < p1 > = run_su brouti ne ( tuple < theta1 >) : post_epr_1
^ b4 { type = CL }:
x = mult_const ( p1 ) : 16
minus_theta1 = mult_const ( theta1 ) : -1
delta1 = add_cval_c ( minus_theta1 , x )
delta1 = add_cval_c ( delta1 , alpha )
send_cmsg ( csocket , delta1 )
^ b5 { type = CC }:
m1 = recv_cmsg ( csocket )
^ b6 { type = CL }:
y = mult_const ( p2 ) : 16
minus_theta2 = mult_const ( theta2 ) : -1
new_beta = b c o n d _ m u l t _ c o n s t ( beta , m1 ) : -1
delta2 = add_cval_c ( new_beta , minus_theta2 )
delta2 = add_cval_c ( delta2 , y )
send_cmsg ( csocket , delta2 )
return_result ( p1 )
return_result ( p2 )

SUBROUTINE post_epr_0
params : theta2
returns : p2
uses : 0
keeps :
request :
NETQASM_START
load C0 @input [0]
set Q0 0
rot_z Q0 C0 4
h Q0
meas Q0 M0
store M0 @output [0]
NETQASM_END
SUBROUTINE post_epr_1
params : theta1
returns : p1
uses : 1
keeps :
request :
NETQASM_START
load C0 @input [0]
set Q0 1

36

64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82

rot_z Q0 C0 4
h Q0
meas Q0 M1
store M1 @output [0]
NETQASM_END
REQUEST req0
callback_type : wait_all
callback :
return_vars :
remote_id : { server_id }
epr_socket_id : 0
num_pairs : 2
window : 5 _000_000
virt_ids : increment 0
timeout : 1000
fidelity : 1.0
typ : create_keep
role : create

Listing 3: Qoala file for Client
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53

META_START
name : server
parameters : client_id
csockets : 0 -> client
epr_sockets : 0 -> client
META_END
^ b0 { type = CL }:
csocket = assign_cval () : 0
iterations = assign_cval () : 0
^ b1 { type = QC }:
run_request ( tuple < >) : req0
^ b2 { type = QL }:
run_ subrou tine ( tuple < >) : local_cphase
^ b3 { type = CC }:
delta1 = recv_cmsg ( csocket )
^ b4 { type = QL }:
tuple < m1 > = run_su brouti ne ( tuple < delta1 >) : meas_qubit_1
^ b5 { type = CL }:
send_cmsg ( csocket , m1 )
^ b6 { type = CC }:
delta2 = recv_cmsg ( csocket )
^ b7 { type = QL }:
tuple < m2 > = run_su brouti ne ( tuple < delta2 >) : meas_qubit_0
^ b8 { type = CL }:
return_result ( m1 )
return_result ( m2 )

SUBROUTINE local_cphase
params :
returns :
uses : 0 , 1
keeps : 0 , 1
request :
NETQASM_START
set Q0 1
set Q1 0
cphase Q0 Q1
NETQASM_END
SUBROUTINE meas_qubit_1
params : delta1
returns : m1
uses : 0 , 1

37

54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92

keeps : 0
request :
NETQASM_START
load C0 @input [0]
set Q1 1
rot_z Q1 C0 4
h Q1
meas Q1 M0
store M0 @output [0]
NETQASM_END
SUBROUTINE meas_qubit_0
params : delta2
returns : m2
uses : 0 , 1
keeps :
request :
NETQASM_START
load C0 @input [0]
set Q0 0
rot_z Q0 C0 4
h Q0
meas Q0 M0
store M0 @output [0]
NETQASM_END
REQUEST req0
callback_type : wait_all
callback :
return_vars :
remote_id : { client_id }
epr_socket_id : 0
num_pairs : 2
window : 5 _000_000
virt_ids : increment 0
timeout : 1000
fidelity : 1.0
typ : create_keep
role : receive

Listing 4: Qoala file for Server
F.VI.
F.VI.a.

Sensitivity to parameters
Dummy Network Scheduler

In order to speed up our simulations when testing the sensitivity of our simulations to the chosen parameters, we do not
explicitly calculate the network schedule each time. To determine when a session obtains minimal service, it is simply
required to know how many PGAs for a particular demand were scheduled in a given network schedule/scheduling interval. From this we can obtain the number of packets which were actually generated by sampling a Binomial(N, ppacket )
distribution, and thereby establish whether the session obtained minimal service in that scheduling interval.
As our network scheduler schedules precisely one PGA per period of the PGT, given which demands/PGTs have
been admitted by the scheduler admission control, we can calculate how many PGAs will be scheduled without having
to calculate the schedule directly. Then as described above we can establish how many packets were generated and
thus whether a session obtained minimal service.
We use this method of simulating the network scheduling for the additional data gathered for sensitivity testing of
the simulation parameters. We also validated it against computing the network schedule and saw a perfect match for
the same datasets.
F.VII.

Calculating the expected queuing time

We use the notation from § VI.iv. Let trenew ∼ Exponential(λ). Then the time which a demand D would sit in the
demand queue for in the absence of other demands is Q ≡ TSI − trenew mod TSI . For convenience we write TSI = T ,
and let tD be the time demand D is submitted. We then calculate:
"
#
∞
∞ Z kT
∞
[
X
X
−1 + eλτ
−λx
FQ (τ ) = P[Q ≤ τ ] = P tD ∈
[kT − τ, kT ] =
λe
dx =
e−kT λ (−1 + eλτ ) =
(20)
−1 + eλT
kT −τ
k=1

k=1

Z T
E[Q] =

Z T
τ dFQ =

0

0

k=1

λτ

τ λe
dτ = T
−1 + eλT
38



1
1
1−
+ λT
λT
e −1



(21)

