Arqon: A suite of control applications enabling a reliable quantum
network
Scarlett Gauthier∗, Thomas R. Beauchamp∗ , Stephanie Wehner
April 13, 2026
proposed a centrally controlled quantum network architecture which is designed to provide this service in a way
that is compatible with the state of the art operating systems for quantum processing nodes, QNodeOS [34] and its
upgrade Qoala [95].
The network architecture in [7] is modular, in the sense
that it is defined to consist of a set of core functionalities,
which may be implemented in separate control applications that can each be modified or upgraded independently
of the others. A control application packages related network functionalities such as admission control and schedule computation, and provides specific algorithms implementing these functionalities. The network architecture
is centered around the periodic computation and distribution of network schedules, enabling internal resources and
end nodes to receive schedules in advance of the times at
which they can be executed. In a proof of principle implementation and evaluation [7], the proportion of satisfied
demands decreased substantially as the number of submitted demands increased, exposing a need for improved
control applications. More broadly, an outstanding challenge in the design of quantum network architectures is
to develop control applications that can deliver reliable
service to end nodes.
In computer networking, a system or protocol is reliable
if it is able to consistently deliver services to their intended
recipients without error or significant delay [74]. Adapting
this principle to the service of a quantum network, we
define the essential features of reliable service:

arXiv:2604.08692v1 [quant-ph] 9 Apr 2026

Abstract
A quantum network’s purpose is to enable users to execute applications on end nodes. This requires the network
to provide the service of creating entangled links between
those nodes. Users of mature networks, such as the internet or the telephone network expect accepted service
demands to be met reliably. We first define reliability
requirements that extend classical computer network concepts to quantum network service delivery. We then introduce Arqon, a suite of control applications designed to
deliver reliable service in centrally controlled quantum networks. We demonstrate through both analytic and numerical evaluation that Arqon satisfies all reliability requirements for accepted demands. These evaluations consider
static network topologies. We provide a complete Python
implementation and perform complexity analysis showing
that admission control scales as O(k 3 ) in the number of
incoming demands k and schedule computation scales as
O(N 3 ) in the number of accepted demands to schedule N .

I.

Introduction

A quantum network enables users to execute applications
that enable new functionalities. These include secure remote computation [3, 18, 23], secure communication which
does not rely on computational assumptions [8, 41], fast
coordination of decisions between remote parties without
the real-time exchange of messages [51, 36, 89, 19, 96],
anonymous leader election [88], and improvements in the (R1) demands receive accept/reject responses;
precision of metrology [60, 47]. These applications require
quantum communication between quantum devices, sup- (R2) accepted demands are satisfied with a tolerably high
probability;
plementing the classical communication which underpins
classical network applications. Entangled links between
(R3) accepted demands are satisfied before their deadlines;
end nodes, known as end-to-end links, are key resources
that can enable arbitrary quantum communication operations. The service that a quantum network must provide (R4) and the amount or frequency of demands from other
to end nodes is to create these end-to-end entangled links
users does not disrupt service to accepted demands.
according to the quality, quantity, and time based requireArqon is a suite of control applications for the centrally
ments of the end node applications.
controlled
quantum network architecture in [7], which is
To correctly schedule the quantum communication operdesigned
to
overcome the challenge of delivering reliable
ations needed in local application execution, the operating
service
to
end
nodes. Arqon comprises four control apsystems of programmable end nodes may rely on a netplications:
A
Network
Manager, a Demand Manager, a
work schedule. This schedule dictates when the nodes can
Network
Scheduler,
and
a Schedule Manager. The Netaccess internal resources of the network to attempt endwork
Manager
is
responsible
for maintaining an accurate
to-end entangled link generation. In [7], Beauchamp et al.
overview of the network, including all components and the
∗ These authors contributed equally.
entanglement generation capabilities of the components.
1

The Demand Manager is responsible for all processes that
explicitly relate to demands, such as registration of new
demands, creating accept/reject responses to send to end
nodes, and re-formatting demands into an internal representation. The Network Scheduler produces network
schedules based on end node demands. In addition to
a Compute Schedule process, the Network Scheduler also
includes an Admit Tasks process that determines whether
demands are accepted for service or rejected. Finally,
the Schedule Manager directs the distribution of network
schedules to all network components.
In this work we make the following contributions:

II.

Related Work

The Arqon suite of control applications is designed to integrate with the centrally controlled quantum network
architecture defined in [7]. This architecture is compatible with the network protocol stack proposed by
Dahlberg et al. in [30], where the stack is decomposed
into layers, each of which exposes a functionality to the
layer above and exploits the functionality of the layer below, as in the classical OSI network model [101]. We make
use of the terminology of this network stack. The physical
layer of the network is responsible for attempting entanglement generation. Above the physical layer is the link
layer, which manages link level entanglement generation,
transforming it into a robust service. The link layer service was experimentally realized in Pompili et al. in [77],
demonstrating it’s viability as a functional layer of a quantum network. Operations such as scheduling entanglement
swaps in a repeater chain and aligning entanglement generation with the memory management service of a quantum
node are functions of the link layer. The network architecture [7] defines a centrally controlled structure for the
network layer, which is responsible for coordinating endto-end entanglement generation. The combination of this
architecture with the Arqon suite of control applications
constitutes an implementation of the network layer.
Experiments on leading quantum network hardware
platforms present a major technological challenge: the expected time to generate an entangled link between neighboring nodes at metropolitan distance scales is almost as
long as the maximum storage time. In a state-of-the-art
demonstration based on trapped ion nodes [67] the average reported time to generate one entangled pair over an
effective 10 km link was 450 ms, while the average maximum storage time was 550 ms with a standard deviation
of 36 ms. In networks where the maximum storage time
of entangled links does not exceed by orders of magnitude
the time required to generate such a link, the multiple
neighboring entangled links required to construct an endto-end link will rarely co-exist. To overcome this technical challenge, Arqon produces network schedules that
simultaneously allocate nodes along end-to-end routes for
durations of time calculated based on end-to-end entanglement generation rates. This method of resource allocation is reminiscent of circuit switching in wired telephone
networks [33, 87], Frame Relay [14, 98], and Autonomous
Transfer Mode (ATM) networks [56, 87, 85].
In wired telephone networks, multiple calls share physical links through time division multiplexing (TDM), where
each call receives a guaranteed time slot within a frame
that repeats at fixed frequency for the entire call duration [33, 87]. The maximum number of simultaneous calls
is determined by the number of time slots per frame on
each link along a route. In ATM networks, multiple virtual circuits share physical links through statistical multiplexing of 53-byte cells transmitted on demand rather
than on fixed schedules [56, 87]. Users requesting virtual circuits provide traffic contracts specifying bounds
on data production: sustained cell rate (average longterm rate), peak cell rate (maximum rate), and maxi-

• We introduce Arqon, the first suite of control applications for a quantum network architecture capable
of delivering reliable service to all accepted demands.
To make this achievement precise, we propose a set
of reliability requirements for service from a quantum
network. We deliver a full performance analysis of our
Network Scheduler control application, proving that
it can meet the proposed requirements. Moreover,
we validate in simulation Arqon’s performance for a
variety of network topologies and sets of demands.
• We provide a Python implementation of Arqon that
enables researchers to simulate realistic multi-user
quantum networks, investigate performance under diverse traffic patterns, and develop extensions to our
control algorithms. In particular, the Arqon simulator allows configuration of a network topology, the entanglement generation capabilities (success rate and
fidelity) between end nodes, and sets of end node application requirements.
• We prove that the operational complexity of our implementation of the Network Scheduler is



O k2R (N + k)2 + R + (N + R)2 + N 3 R ,
where N is the current number of accepted demands
to schedule, k is the number of internal representations of new demands requiring an accept/reject decision, and R is the number of internal resources in
the network (network components that are not end
nodes). In our evaluations, we observe that the time
to produce a network schedule (tcompute ) is always
significantly less than the allowed time, known as a
scheduling interval (T SI ). That is, tcompute ≪ T SI .
The notation used throughout this paper is summarized
in Table 4, included in Appendix A. The rest of this paper
is organized as follows: In Section II we discuss related
work. In Section III we discuss design considerations for
Arqon. In Section IV we define each control application
in turn. In Section V we state and prove performance
results for the abstractly defined control applications. In
Section VI we discuss a specific implementation of Arqon
in Python. In Section VII we provide an operational complexity analysis of this implementation. In Section VIII
we discuss results from numeric simulations. Finally, we
conclude in Section IX and discuss our outlook on future
research goals.
2

mum burst size (longest burst at peak rate). AdmisIII. Design Considerations
sion control evaluates these contracts and, if accepted,
calculates effective bandwidth to reserve along the entire Our task is to design a suite of control applications, which
route for the virtual circuit’s duration [85]. Frame Relay when integrated into the modular architecture defined
uses similar mechanisms to ATM but with variable-length in [7], create a quantum network satisfying all of the reliframes (1 to 8,192 bytes) and a simpler single-service-class ability requirements (R1)-(R4). From these requirements
quality of service model with three parameters: a guar- we derive the following core considerations which guide
anteed data transfer rate (Committed Information Rate the design of the Arqon suite of control applications.
(CIR)), an allowed burst size at the CIR and a maximum amount that a burst may exceed the CIR [14, 98]. III.i. Core Considerations
In contrast, Arqon schedules exclusive end-to-end physical access for demand-dependent durations separated by (C1) Algorithms that handle time-sensitive network
scheduling must execute within bounded time, requirdemand-dependent minimum separation intervals when
ing operational complexity that is polynomial in the
routes fully release access. Network-wide schedules are
number of demands.
pre-computed sequentially for extended scheduling intervals that are long relative to typical access durations. Ar(C2) Service agreements must be created for accepted deqon’s admission control evaluates user demands, with acmands, defining the type and quality of service that
cepted demands receiving service agreements guaranteeArqon commits to provide. In complement, rejection
ing a minimum scheduling frequency per interval while
messages must be sent to rejected demands.
respecting minimum separation requirements.
(C3) A demand may be accepted by Arqon if and only if
acceptance will not disrupt any existing service agreements.
Many proposals of quantum network architectures and
protocols, including those of [26, 76, 49, 93, 39, 92, 4,
99], have considered the problem of coordinating the gen- (C4) Arqon must support dynamic updates of the network
topology by allowing new nodes to register and reeration of end-to-end entangled links, requiring the use
moving network components that fail or become unof network resources. Van meter et al. in [92] further
responsive.
proposed a framework for routing of entanglement across
many smaller networks, and identified the types of protoService agreements will be formally defined in Seccols required to do so. A common feature of these archition
IV, following necessary preliminaries.
tectures and protocols is that they do not aim to provide
end nodes with a guaranteed quality of service and they
do not develop protocols for preventing arriving requests III.ii. Network Model
from disrupting service to existing requests. In contrast,
We consider a centrally controlled quantum network where
Arqon is designed to provide end nodes with guaranteed
user controlled end nodes submit demands encoding apquality of service agreements which derive from end node
plication execution requirements [7]. Demands are not for
application execution requirements and it incorporates an
single entangled pairs, but rather for repeated creation of
admission control process that can reject arriving demands
packets containing multiple entangled links, with a minito prevent disrupting existing service agreements.
mum separation time between packets, until the demand
expires. The network can be classified as a generate-whenrequested network, where end-to-end entangled links are
In [84] Skrzypczyk et al. defined a quantum network created to serve these demands. This means we do not
architecture for meeting quality of service requirements in assume that end-to-end entangled links can be stored bemulti-user quantum networks. Quality of service was de- tween any two scheduled periods of time. This type of
fined with respect to classically inspired metrics (through- network is implementable with the technological maturity
put and jitter of entangled link generation) and quan- of current devices and those that will exist in the coming
tum specific metrics (fidelity of generated entanglement). years. In the following sub-section, we introduce the netThe architecture employs Time-Division Multiple-Access work components that can be used to construct a general
(TDMA) [82] scheduling with fixed-duration time slots, purpose quantum network.
granting contention-free access to all qubits along a demand’s assigned route for integer numbers of consecutive III.ii.a. Network Components
slots. The authors identified the need for an admission
control protocol to prevent arriving demands from disrupt- At the physical layer, a general quantum network may coning service to existing demands. However, no admission sist of a heterogeneous mixture of quantum nodes and the
control protocol was defined or implemented, leaving the interfaces between them, in an arbitrary topology. Figarchitecture unable to satisfy reliability requirement (R4). ure 1 represents a possible network topology as a graph,
In contrast, Arqon defines a concrete admission control where network components are illustrated as colored nodes
protocol which rejects demands that cannot be satisfied and edges connecting components indicate logical connecwithout disrupting service to accepted demands.
tions. We consider the following network components:
3

Legend
Central
Controller

End Node
Metropolitan Hub

I1
H1

EGI

B.B. Logic
J1

B1

J2

Junction (Border) Node

I3
H2

Long Distance Backbone
Repeater Node

I2

Control Processor

Figure 1: Example quantum network resource graph G = (V, E) for a quantum network where the resources to
be shared are a long distance backbone channel B1 , two junction nodes J1 , J2 , and three entanglement generation
interfaces I1 , I2 , I3 grouped into two metropolitan hubs (H1 and H2 ). Edges represent logical connections, that is if
(v1 , v2 ) ∈ E, then it is possible to create an optical path between components v1 and v2 , possibly via some optical
switch.
• End Nodes These devices execute programs realizing part of a quantum network application, operate
under independent (local) control, and accept input
from users. An end node may be a quantum processing node with some quantum memory capabilities, as
in [79, 78, 64, 69, 29, 91, 25, 24], or a device without
quantum memory which is capable of preparing/measuring photons, as in [37, 12]. Any end node can also
perform classical operations, such as arithmetic operations and classical communication. Resources within
the end nodes are managed locally, for example by
the operating system QNodeOS [34] or its upgrade
Qoala [95], and are therefore not under the direct
control of any network controller. The local control
includes a quantum network agent, which is a process
responsible for communicating with a central network
controller. This agent submits demands to the central network controller, retrieves and installs network
schedules and processes network status messages.

detection-in-midpoint protocols (e.g., heralded
entanglement generation [21, 38]) use Bell-State
Analyzers (BSAs) [16, 71, 97]; source-inmidpoint protocols [57] use entangled photon
sources; and sender-receiver protocols use only
optical channels [13, 31, 73]. Each EGI can
only facilitate the generation of entangled links
between a single pair of nodes at any one time.
– Switches A switch is a reconfigurable interface
that routes signals between different paths. Optical switches are compatible with fiber-based or
free-space implementations (where light travels
through air or vacuum). In both cases, an optical switch enables dynamic, high-speed reconfiguration of signal paths, supporting efficient
routing. Switches allow the metropolitan hub
to allocate pairs of nodes optical access to EGIs
according to the network schedule.
• Long-Distance Backbones A long-distance backbone is a repeater chain consisting of a linear sequence of repeater nodes, such as those in [21, 38, 83,
81, 80]. The network treats each backbone as a single component that produces entangled links between
its two border nodes [68] at a fixed rate and average
fidelity. A long-distance backbone controller configures the repeater chain according to a repeater policy
(see e.g. [17, 55, 46]). The repeater nodes and border
nodes are automated components that strictly implement a repeater policy without supporting additional
control logic.

• Central Controller The purpose of the central controller is to produce network schedules in response to
demands from end nodes. To do so, the central controller also maintains information about the overall
network topology and the entanglement generation
capabilities of each component in the network. The
central controller hosts a suite of control applications
which implement its various functionalities.
• Metropolitan Hubs A metropolitan hub facilitates
a scalable method of multi-user network access [42,
43]. A metropolitan hub contains a logical control
element which enforces the network schedule by controlling the physical devices used to realize the schedule. These devices are:

• Junction Nodes A junction node is a border node
equipped with additional control logic to support network branching. They provide an interface between
multiple repeater chains and between repeater chains
and a metropolitan hub. They have the physical capabilities to execute remote entanglement generation
protocols, store the resulting entangled links, and perform entanglement swaps. The logical controller of a

– Entanglement
Generation
Interfaces
(EGIs) These devices mediate entangled link
generation between neighboring nodes via
remote entanglement generation protocols [13,
57]. Different protocols require different EGIs:
4

junction node manages local resources (such as quan- ticular, the time required to send a message over the intum memories) to execute the network schedule.
ternet varies, and a difference of several ms may occur in
the communication times of repeated messages between a
fixed sender and receiver.
III.ii.b. Independently Programmed End Nodes
An additional type of timing consideration is that entanMulti-node quantum network applications are partitioned glement generation involves sequential non-overlapping atinto separate single-node programs that are run concur- tempts, each with a particular sequence of operations, setrently on different end nodes. The central controller is not ting a minimum period and maximum rate for the process.
aware of the programs on independent end nodes. Each This also means operations cannot change mid-attempt
program contains instructions for local classical and quan- without disrupting entanglement generation. The large
tum computations, and programs on separate end nodes differences in timescales between the physical layer and
interact with each other only through classical messaging higher layers of the network stack imply that scheduling
and entanglement generation [95].
and triggering of actions at the physical layer is not a funcThis hybrid classical-quantum programming model has tion of any higher layer of the network stack, but is the
an important implication for resource management: pro- responsibility of dedicated and sophisticated electronics
grams can be structured into sub-routines such that quan- that are key components of the physical layer.
tum states required by one sub-routine need not persist
through following sub-routines. Individual quantum states III.v. Architecture
therefore need not be stored for the entire program duraWe state key features of our network architecture [7], as
tion.
we make frequent reference to these features when defining
the Arqon control applications.
III.iii. Physical Considerations
For simplicity, we assume quantum network applications
are
executed between two end nodes. However, our archiGeneration of end-to-end entanglement requires impletecture
is directly compatible with applications involving
menting some intermediary protocols, in particular permultiple
end nodes.
forming many physical attempts to generate entanglement
between neighboring network components. Each of these
physical attempts only succeeds probabilistically, resulting
in some average rate of successfully generating end-to-end
entangled links. Successfully generated entangled links are
stored in quantum memories, which are subject to timedependent errors due to environmental interactions [102,
90]. These decoherence processes limit the storage time,
characterized by the memory coherence time [66, 75, 100].
To execute a sub-routine of an application program that
requires a packet of entangled links, all links must remain
sufficiently coherent throughout the duration of the subroutine. Consequently, all links in a packet must be generated within a time window w determined by both the
quantum memory coherence times and the sub-routine execution duration. The probability that a batch of attempts
to generate end-to-end entangled links succeeds and the
packet generation window w are not simply modeling parameters, they are inherited from the physical capabilities
of the network components.
III.iv.

III.v.a.

Application Sessions

The aim of users of a quantum network is to successfully
run applications. To do so, they execute hybrid classicalquantum programs on independent end nodes. As many
hybrid programs have probabilistic outcomes, it is often
required to execute the same program many times to extract a useful and reliable output. Realizing a single execution of a quantum network application requires each
collaborating end node to successfully execute their local
program. We refer to each of these individual executions
of an application as an application instance. In practice,
applications are typically associated with a deadline, before which all application instances must be executed. To
capture these requirements, we define an application session.
Definition 1 (Application Session). Suppose end nodes
N = (node1, node2, ...) wish to execute application App at
least N inst times, before time texpiry .
Then we write the corresponding application session
as
S = (session_id, N , APP, N inst , texpiry ),
(1)

Timescales

The time required for network elements to complete actions can only be estimated with finite precision. At the
physical layer, actions have precisely characterized durations, allowing for accurate synchronization between multiple nodes, with timing precision ranging from tens of picoseconds (ps) to microseconds (µs) to milliseconds (ms),
depending on the operations [78, 34]. Precise timing of a
sequence of operations is crucial for processes like entanglement generation [11, 54, 69, 64, 25, 24, 65].
In contrast, at higher layers of the network stack, actions have variable durations and latencies, limiting feasible timing precision to µs or ms [59, 86, 20]. In par-

where session_id is a unique identifier for the session.
To ensure feasibility, it is necessary that the specified
expiry time, texpiry , is longer than any time-scale of the
network. To establish a common understanding of how
to locally configure programs for executing an application
session (1) and ensure appropriate resource allocation, the
end nodes in N execute two processes: a network capability update and capability negotiation [7]. In the network
capability update, each node independently queries a network capability table obtained from the central controller
5

Demand Registration
Admit Tasks
Compute Schedule
Distribute Schedule
Execute Schedule
k−3

k−2

k−1
Scheduling Interval

k

k+1

Figure 2: Process sequence resulting in execution of a network schedule in scheduling interval k. The hatched, colorful
processes are executed in the indicated scheduling intervals in order to produce and distribute the schedule which will
be executed in scheduling interval k. The grey processes highlight the periodic nature of our architecture.
to retrieve end-to-end entanglement generation capabiliAs a new addition to the model from [7], we introduce
ties for each suitable path, including the average entan- a service error parameter, ϵservice
, associated with a ded
glement generation rate and the corresponding minimum mand d. This parameter allows precise specification of
fidelity of entangled pairs. In capability negotiation, the the reliability requirement (R2) for each demand d,
end nodes in N communicate to coordinate their local reP[demand d is satisfied] ≥ (1 − ϵservice
).
(4)
source requirements for executing application programs,
d
using the acquired network capabilities as input.
In a deployment of Arqon, the service error parameter
may be chosen according to service contracts (i.e. conIII.v.b. Application Demands
tracts between the network operator and its clients) or
Based on their requirements, application sessions on end priority classes associated with the demand. In some imnodes submit demands for packets of entanglement gener- plementations, it may be set by the central controller.
ation to the network. A distinct group of end nodes may
simultaneously host multiple application sessions, hence
III.v.c. Periodic Computation and Distribution
the group may be associated with multiple demands at
of Schedules
once.
The central controller must regularly accept demands, as
Definition 2 (Demand). Application sessions register well as compute and distribute network schedules. Each
demands. These demands have the format
schedule is associated with a version identifier and covers
an identical execution time known as the scheduling interraw
minsep expiry
inst
d
= (p; t
;t
;N
)
(2)
val (denoted T SI ). Figure 2 is an illustrated overview of
where p = (w, s, F ) defines a packet of s pairs to be gen- the process sequence that enables execution of a network
erated within time window w, with minimum fidelity F ; schedule for a scheduling interval k.
In our network architecture there is a constant schedultminsep is a minimum time separation between attempts to
ing
offset, in terms of a number of scheduling intervals,
expiry
generate packets, t
is the expiry time of the applibetween
the interval at which a demand passes demand
inst
cation session, N
is the number of successes required
registration
and the time at which the first schedule involvto satisfy the demand. A demand is associated with iming
the
demand
will be executed if accepted. In Figure 2, a
plementation specific metadata, denoted Md . The full descheduling
offset
of two scheduling intervals is illustrated.
mand can then be represented as
To account for this offset, when demands are registered
start
is calculated and
d = (draw , Md ).
(3) their earliest possible start time t
added to the internal representation of the demand.
The metadata accompanying a demand is implementation specific and should include source and destination III.v.d. Packet Generation Attempts
identifiers for the end nodes. Analogously to the metadata
which accompanies a data packet in the classical internet, Network schedules allocate packet generation atmetadata can be used to inform control processes, includ- tempts (PGAs) to accepted demands. A PGA always has
ing routing.
some duration E, success probability ppacket , and reserves
In our original formulation [7], the raw demand in- internal resources on an end-to-end route through the
cluded a parameter Rpacket specifying the average re- network. PGAs are associated with a success probability
quested rate of successful packet generation until the ex- due to the probabilistic nature of generating entangled
piry time texpiry . We have removed Rpacket from (2), as the links. It is impossible to guarantee that a packet will be
number of instances N inst and expiry time texpiry together generated when any finite execution time is allocated to
specify an average rate of packet generation.
a PGA.
6

A minimum separation time between successful packet
generation, tminsep , is specified as part of a demand. In the
PGA framework, this is enforced as a minimum separation
time between subsequently scheduled PGAs for the same
demand. This minimum separation is included to ensure
that there is sufficient time for the local runtime environment on end nodes to execute local operations before
the next allocated period of time for generating entangled
links begins. Examples of these local operations are additional blocks of quantum operations in the application
program, or operations to reset the hardware between subsequent attempts to generate a packet.

The minimum allocation is a number NγSI
of PGAs that
d
must be scheduled for the PGT γd in each scheduling interval between tstart and its expiry time, in order to ensure the demand will be satisfied with at least probability
(1 − ϵservice
).
d
Definition 4 (Minimal allocation). Let γd be a PGT for
demand d, let tstart be the start time of the first scheduling interval in which demand d may be scheduled, and let
nSI = ⌈(texpiry
− tstart
)/T SI ⌉. Let NγSI
be such that if
d
d
d
X ∼ Binomial(NγSI
nSI , ppacket
),
γd
d

(5)

P[X < Ndinst ] < ϵservice
.
d

(6)

then
III.v.e.

Packet Generation Tasks

Packet Generation Tasks (PGTs) are the internal demand
representation format in our network architecture [7].
They are persistent tasks requiring the central controller
to schedule PGAs to serve an accepted demand until it expires or is terminated. To create a PGT γ from a demand
it is necessary to determine a suitable duration Eγ and
packet success probability ppacket
for the PGAs. These
γ
key parameters of a PGA must be set based on the endto-end entanglement generation capabilities along a particular path. For this reason, a PGT γ is created for a
particular end-to-end entanglement generation path πγ .
We formally define PGTs in Section IV.ii.b.

IV.

Let #d (S) be the number of PGAs for demand d scheduled
in schedule S. Then we say a demand receives minimal
allocation in schedule S if #d (S) >= NγSI
.
d
In the rest of this section we describe each control application in turn, beginning with the Network Manager.
IV.i.

Network Manager

The Network Manager is responsible for maintaining an
accurate overview of all network components, their relevant capabilities, and current statuses. Its most basic
function is to compose and maintain a graph G = (V, E),
called the network resource graph. The vertices V are
network components, and the logical connections between
components are indicated by the set of edges E. The Network Manager sets the duration of a scheduling interval,
which is a global parameter that must be communicated
to the other control applications. The other core processes
of the Network Manager are Node Registration, Path Computation and a Network Capabilities Manager (NCM).
The Network Manager provides two interfaces to the
central controller, known as the node (NM:N) interface
and the network capabilities (NM:NC) interface, and an
internal interface to the other control applications, known
as the path (NM:P) interface. The node interface is used
by nodes (re-)joining the network to register themselves.
The network capabilities interface allows end nodes to obtain information about the entanglement generation capabilities of the network. The path interface allows other
Arqon control applications to access information about the
paths in the network either by requesting a data structure
called the path partition, denoted Π, or by requesting sets
of paths between specific pairs of nodes.

Arqon Suite of Control
Applications

Arqon consists of four control applications: Network Manager, a Demand Manager, a Network Scheduler, and a
Schedule Manager. These control applications are hosted
by a central controller, such as an implementation of an
Software Defined Network (SDN) controller [62, 50, 70,
61]. The central controller manages all communication
with other network components. Figure 3 is a systems interaction diagram that provides an overview of the control
applications and their shared interfaces.
To allow the clearest possible description of the Arqon
control applications, we first define the service agreements
that Arqon creates when a demand is accepted for service,
which is accompanied by delivery of an ACCEPT message
to the end node(s) that submitted the demand. Service
agreements may only be updated or canceled in the case
of network component failure(s) disrupting the compatible end-to-end entanglement generation routes through
the network.

IV.i.a. Network Resource Graph
Definition 3 (Service Agreement). The service agreement
created for an accepted demand is a guarantee from Arqon The network resource graph, G = (V, E) is an undirected
graph in which all the schedulable components in the netthat:
work are vertices. The set of vertices can be decomposed
“In every scheduling interval between tstart and
as V = E ⊔ R where E is the set of end nodes and R is
the demand being terminated or expiring, at least the set of schedulable internal resources: EGIs (I), junca number of PGAs called a minimal allocation
tion nodes (J) and long-distance backbones (B). Each
will be scheduled for the PGT accepted to realize long-distance backbone is allocated as a single unit and
the demand.”
is therefor represented by a single vertex in the network
7

Arqon
DM:B

«Component»

Network Scheduler

DM:DS

«Component»

Demand Manager

SM:SD

«Component»

NM:P

DM:D

«Component»

Network Manager

NM:N

Schedule Manager

NM:NC

SM:S
Y

X

Z

Central Controller
Figure 3: System Component diagram for Arqon. The interfaces CC:II are described in the main text. The interface
X allows Arqon to update the status of demands, interface Y allows Arqon to retrieve the current capabilities of
network nodes and Z allows Arqon to push network schedules to components.
register itself with the central controller. This is handled
by the Node Registration process of the Network Manager
via the node (NM:N) interface with the central controller.
When nodes register with the Network Manager it assigns
a unique node ID that Arqon uses in the creation and
distribution of network schedules, and it triggers updates
to the network resource graph and the network capabilities
table maintained by the NCM. A registration response is
returned to the node with the assigned node ID.

resource graph. A network resource graph for a dumbbell network connecting two metropolitan areas across a
long-distance backbone is illustrated in Figure 1.
The edges of the network resource graph G represent
the logical connections between components. For example,
if a metropolitan hub contains two EGIs which can be
accessed by end node e, G has an edge between e and each
of these EGIs. In practice, such a setup could be realized
with a single physical connection from the end node to
an optical switch located at the metropolitan hub. The
optical switch could then be configured to open a physical
path from the end node to either of the specific EGIs.
A path π = (v0 , v1 , ..., vk ) through the network resource
graph G is a sequence of vertices vi ∈ V where for each
adjacent pair (vi , vi+1 ) there is an edge e ∈ E connecting
vi and vi+1 , and no vertex is visited more than once. It
is only possible to serve demands for end-to-end entanglement generation if there is at least one path through
the internal resources connecting two end nodes. If such
a path exists between all pairs of end nodes, the network
resource graph is internally connected.

IV.i.c.

Path Computation identifies which paths through the network resource graph are suitable for generating end-to-end
entangled links between any two end nodes. It is not a
time-critical process and is only triggered by updates to
the network resource graph. As end nodes are under local control only, valid end-to-end entanglement generation
paths do not traverse end nodes.
Definition 6 (Valid entanglement generation paths). Let
G be a network resource graph with end nodes E. Let
π = (π0 , ..., πk ) be a path in G. Then we say that π is
a valid entanglement generation path if:

Definition 5 (Internally Connected). We say that a network resource graph G = (V, E) with end nodes E is internally connected if for all pairs of nodes v, v ′ ∈ V,
there exists a path π = (v, π1 , ..., πk−1 , v ′ ) in G such that
∀i, πi ∈
/ E.

1. π0 ̸= πk
2. π0 , πk ∈ E

End-to-end paths must not pass through end nodes, because these are under local control only and are not bound
to execute network schedules.
IV.i.b.

Path Computation

3. ∀i = 1, ..., k − 1; πi ∈
/ E.
We denote the set of all valid entanglement generation
paths by Pvalid .

Node Registration

The number of valid entanglement generation paths
When a node joins the network for the first time, or re- through a network with resource graph G is O(2|V| ). For
joins the network after a period of inactivity, it needs to large networks, this can quickly grow to a size which is
8

infeasible to efficiently compute. Therefore, implementations of Arqon may benefit from reducing the set of valid
entanglement generation paths to a set of allowable paths
by imposing additional restrictions on the paths which
may be used to realize a demand.
The outcome of Path Computation is a data structure
called the path partition, Π, which is a disjoint partition
of all valid or allowable entanglement generation paths. In
Section VI we define a specific path partition, but Arqon is
compatible with any disjoint partition of Pvalid . Looking
forward, a disjoint path partition is useful in enabling efficient scheduling of network resources, as non-overlapping
paths can be simultaneously scheduled to produce entanglement serving different demands without any ill effects.
IV.i.d.

Demand Manager
«Component»
Demand Registration

Metadata
checks

D

Create
PGTs

D
{γ}

Sanity
Checks

NM:P

PASS/
FAIL D

{π}

«Component»

{γ}

«Component»
Buffer Manager

Intake and
Status Manager

DM:DS

DM:B

Network Capabilities Manager

The NCM maintains a network capabilities table containing the end-to-end entanglement generation capabilities
of each path π ∈ Π. The network capabilities table has a
version identifier that is incremented with each update.
The demands issued by end nodes (see (2) and (3)) include a minimum fidelity F , a number of instances N inst ,
and an expiry time texpiry , all of which are not arbitrary,
but should be informed by the entanglement generation
capabilities along paths π ∈ Π. To obtain this information, end nodes query the central controller for their entries of the network capabilities table [7]. The metadata
that is included with a demand includes the network capability version id, which is used by the Demand Manager
to screen demands before registering them.
Other Arqon control applications also need to read
the entanglement generation capabilities along end-to-end
routes, in particular the Demand Manager. For this reason, the path partition Π is updated by the Network Capabilities Manager to specify these capabilities for each
path π ∈ Π.
In practice, the NCM may establish the end-to-end entanglement generation capabilities in a variety of ways.
A direct method would be for the central controller to
periodically schedule blocks of time for characterization
of end-to-end routes. An implementation may include a
method of determining the entanglement generation capabilities of an end-to-end route from the capabilities of
every link in the route individually.

X

DM:D

Figure 4: Detailed diagram of the internals of the Demand
Manager. The arrows show the process of registering a demand, showing how the demand submission D is passed
from metadata checks to Create PGTs. The relevant paths
{π} are obtained via the NM:P interface, before the created PGTs {γ} are also passed to the sanity checks. Finally, any PGTs which pass the sanity checks are passed
to the buffer manager and an PASS/FAIL message is sent
back to the intake and status manager as appropriate. The
interface X provided by the central controller is used to update the statuses of demands at the relevant end nodes.
DM:B interface allows the Network Scheduler to retrieve
a buffer of registered demands and a buffer of demands to
terminate, held by the Buffer Manager. Finally, the DM:D
interface is an interface to the central controller through
which the Demand Manager retrieves arriving demands
and termination requests for existing demands. The Demand Manager with all internal components and interfaces
is illustrated in Figure 4.
IV.ii.a.

Intake and Status Manager

The Intake and Status Manager is the first process which
a demand interacts with. For every incoming demand it
first assigns a unique demand ID and creates an entry in
a ledger of demand statuses, with an initial status flag
indicating that the demand is not yet registered. The deIV.ii. Demand Manager
mand status flag is updated as it progresses through each
The Demand Manager, is responsible for receiving, screen- further processing step. The demand is not removed from
ing and registering incoming demands, converting de- the status ledger until it is either rejected, expires, or is
mands into PGTs, maintaining an accurate ledger of de- terminated by the end nodes. Each incoming demand is
mand statuses, and creating the status messages that the added to a First In First Out (FIFO) queue, where it recentral controller sends to end nodes. These processes are mains until a worker of the Demand Registration process
implemented by an Intake and Status Manager, a Demand removes it. An implementation may also specify an alterRegistration process, and a Buffer Manager. The Demand native queuing system for Demand Registration, including
Manager provides three interfaces: the DemandStatus a priority based queuing system.
The Intake and Status Manager interprets PASS/FAIL
(DM:DS) interface, the Buffer (DM:B) interface and the
Demand (DM:D) interface. The DM:DS interface is used outcomes received from Demand Registration and
by the Network Scheduler to update demand statuses with ACCEPT/REJECT outcomes received from the Network
ACCEPT/REJECT outcomes after admission control. The Scheduler through the DM:DS interface. Upon receipt of a
9

FAIL or REJECT outcome it issues a demand rejection message to end nodes, with an error code indicating whether
the demand failed in Demand Registration (FAIL) or was
rejected by the Network Scheduler (REJECT). Upon receipt
of a PASS or ACCEPT outcome, it updates the status of the
demand. For an ACCEPT outcome the Intake and Status
Manager further creates a demand acceptance message for
end nodes, which includes a service agreement.
IV.ii.b.

Demand Registration

Demand Registration comprises three phases: a metadata
check, the creation of a set of Packet Generation Tasks
(PGTs), and implementation specific sanity checks. There
are a finite number of parallel instances of the Demand
Registration process, known as workers, each of which
handles the registration of one demand at a time. Workers return a PASS/FAIL outcome for each demand to the
Intake Manager and take the next demand from the demand queue, as long as it is not empty. An implementation
may specify any number of workers, including just a single
worker.
1. Metadata check:
The following assertions must be true for a demand
to be valid:
(a) The network capability version identifier is of the
expected data type and corresponds to the latest
version;
(b) Both end node id’s correspond to registered
nodes and are of the expected data type;
(c) There is an allowed/valid path π connecting the
source and destination nodes;
(d) The message is a well-formatted demand adhering to the format in (2).
(e) Each of N inst , F, w, s > 0 and all fields are of
the expected data type.
(f) The expiry time texpiry is later than tstart ,
texpiry > tstart .
These assertions are necessary to ensure that a demand can be handled in a consistent manner by the
network. Additional metadata checks may be specified by an implementation.
2. Create Packet Generation Tasks: A PGT is associated with a particular path from the source to destination end node. To create a PGT γd for a demand d
with a path πγd ∈ Π it is necessary to set the duration
of the PGAs (Eγd ), to calculate the packet success
probability (ppacket
), and to calculate the minimum
γd
allocation (NγSI
).
In
Section VI, we specify a particd
ular method of setting Eγd and calculating ppacket
.
γd
The minimal allocation (Definition 4) is the key parameter of the service agreement that Arqon creates
for each accepted demand. It depends on the service
error parameter, ϵservice
, which is either specified by
d
the end nodes as part of the demand, or set by the
central controller.
10

Definition 7 (Packet Generation Task). A packet
generation task is a tuple
γ = (Eγ , NγSI , πγ , tminsep
, texpiry
, tstart
)
γ
γ
γ

(7)

where Eγ is the execution time of each packet generation attempt (PGA), NγSI is the minimum allocation
for γ, πγ ∈ Π is a valid entanglement generation path
and tminsep
, texpiry
are as in the raw demand (2), and
γ
γ
tstart
is the first scheduling interval in which a PGA
γ
for γ could be scheduled, based on the scheduling offset.
In general, there may be multiple valid entanglement
generation paths between two end nodes. Each of
these paths is only suitable to realize the demand if
its average rate of end-to-end entanglement generation is high enough so that demanded sd pairs can be
generated within a window of time wd with a non-zero
probability ppacket
> 0. In the Create PGTs phase of
γd
Demand Registration each demand d is mapped to
a set Γd of suitable PGTs, from which at most one
particular PGT γ will be accepted by the Network
Scheduler. This also means that a routing decision
for a demand d is not made until the Admit Tasks
process of the Network Scheduler, where a particular
γ ∈ Γd may be accepted for scheduling.
3. Implementation specific sanity checks:
Once Γd is constructed, then each possible PGT
γ ∈ Γd may undergo further sanity checks. If a PGT
γ fails a sanity check, then it is removed from Γd . We
define one necessary sanity check, to verify that for
each proposed PGT γ ∈ Γd
Eγ ≤ T SI ,

(8)

meaning that the execution time of a single PGA of
the PGT γ must not exceed the scheduling interval.
If all PGTs fail the sanity check, then the demand is
marked as invalid and a FAIL outcome is returned to
the Intake Manager. Otherwise, a PASS outcome is
returned to the Intake Manager and Γd is passed to
the Buffer Manager to be added to the demand intake
buffer, denoted Γ.
IV.ii.c.

Buffer Manager

The sets of PGTs Γd which can realize each demand d
that passes Demand Registration are needed as an input
to the Network Scheduler control application. Between
Demand Registration and the Network Scheduler however
there is a type of timing boundary, in that the Network
Scheduler executes a set of periodic processes once per
scheduling interval, whereas Demand Registration occurs
based on the queue arrival dynamics of demands and the
availability of workers. Due to this mismatch in process
timings, the set of PGTs γd for each registered demand d
are placed into a task intake buffer Γ, which is maintained
by the Buffer Manager.

Algorithm 1: Algorithm for the main process of
the Network Scheduler control application. UpdateFillingClasses, AdmitTasks and ComputeNewSchedule are given in Algorithms 4, 5
and 3 respectively.

Network Scheduler
«Component»
Compute Schedule
«Component»
Admit Tasks
Γ

DM:DS

Φ

«Subprocess»
Minimal

Function NetworkScheduler:
Input : Set of filling classes Φ
Output: List of accepted PGTs A, network
schedule S
while True do
Get Π from the Network Manager ;
Get τ, Γ from the Demand Manager;
Set Φ, ξ ←
UpdateFillingClasses(Φ, τ, Π) ;
Set Φ, A ← AdmitTasks(Γ, Φ, ξ);
Send (A, Γ \ A) to the Demand Manager;
Set S ← ComputeSchedule(Φ) ;
Send S to the Schedule Manager;
sleep until the start of the next scheduling
interval;
end
end

Φ, S
Φ
«Subprocess»
Bonus

DM:B

τ

NM:P

«Component»
Update
Filling Classes

Π

Φ
S
«Subprocess»
Distribution

SM:SD

Figure 5: Detailed diagram of the Network Scheduler. Arrows show the movement of the set of filling classes Φ and
the network schedule S through the scheduling process.
Within the Buffer Manager, Γ is write only. In contrast,
the Demand Manager exposes Γ to the Network Scheduler
control application via the DM:B interface, but the buffer
is exposed with read only access. The structure used to
represent what is read from the task intake buffer by the
Network Scheduler is referred to as the task intake object
and is also denoted Γ for simplicity. After the buffer has
been read by the Network Scheduler, the Buffer Manager
must implement a flush of the buffer. In an implementation, the Buffer Manager may flush the entire buffer
after each read. Alternatively, it may be that the Network Scheduler only reads a maximum number M of sets
of PGTs Γi , i ∈ {0, 1, · · · , M − 1} from the buffer in each
read. In that case the Buffer Manager may implement a
flush of only the top M sets of PGTs after a read.
Similarly, it needs to maintain a buffer of requests from
end nodes to terminate demands, called the termination
buffer τ . As with Γ, this is write-only from the within
the Buffer Manager itself, and via the DM:B interface it
is exposed in read-only form to the Network Scheduler.
Unlike Γ, the Network Scheduler should always read the
entire termination buffer. Once this has occurred, the entire buffer is flushed so that it is ready to receive more
termination requests in the next scheduling interval.
IV.iii.

Network Scheduler

The Network Scheduler is responsible for determining
which PGTs to accept and for producing network schedules that uphold service agreements with end nodes. These
network schedules must include a minimum allocation
of PGAs for each accepted PGT. It includes an Admit
Tasks process that examines PGTs γ ∈ Γ in the task intake buffer and determines if they can be accepted without disrupting already accepted PGTs. It also includes a
Compute Schedule process that occurs after Admit Tasks
and produces these network schedules. This control ap11

plication is time critical, as its processes must start and
complete within a single scheduling interval to ensure distribution and execution of a network schedule will not
be delayed. Algorithm 1 for NetworkScheduler is an
overview of the main loop of the Network Scheduler control
application, and Figure 5 illustrates the Network Scheduler with all internal components.
In our network model, we assume that each network
component can only be scheduled to execute PGAs for
a single PGT at any given time, and each PGA is nonpreemptive. Two different PGAs γ1 and γ2 can be scheduled simultaneously as long as πγ1 ∩ πγ2 = ∅. To account
for these considerations, Arqon structures network schedules as a set of aligned resource schedules, one per network
component. To schedule a PGA for a PGT γ, all resources
on the path πγ of the PGT must be simultaneously available for an uninterrupted period of time that is at least
as long as the PGA duration Eγ . As illustrated in Figure
6, it is possible for a network schedule to contain gaps of
time in which certain resources have no PGAs scheduled,
but the subsequently scheduled PGAs can not be started
earlier due to the requirement that all resources on the
path πγ be simultaneously available. Figure 6 also illustrates that there are situations in which the total amount
of available time on a network resource is greater than or
equal to a PGA duration, however the available time is
non-consecutive and therefore the PGA cannot actually
be scheduled.
To determine which PGTs can be simultaneously scheduled, Arqon leverages a partition of active PGTs into cells
called filling classes that are based on the path partition
Π. Active PGTs are those that have been accepted in some
scheduling interval and have neither expired nor been terminated. The filling classes are used by both Admit Tasks
and Compute Schedule.

J1

γ1

I1

γ1

I2

γ1

γ2

γ3
γ3

γ2

γ5

γ2

I3

γ4

γ3

0

γ6
T SI

Figure 6: Excerpt from a possible network schedule for four components J1 , I1−3 and a set of PGTs γ1−6 . PGAs for
a PGT γi are illustrated by gray boxes scheduled simultaneously on every component on their path πγi . PGAs for γ4
and γ6 , illustrated by red boxes, can not be added to the schedule because I1 (for γ4 ) and I3 (for γ6 ) are not available
for sufficiently long blocks of uninterrupted time before the end of the scheduling interval, illustrated by the red line
labeled T SI .
Definition 8 (Filling Classes). Let Π = {Πϕ } be a disjoint partition of a set of paths P and let Z be a set of
PGTs such that ∀γ ∈ Z, ∃ϕ s.t. πγ ∈ Πϕ . The set of
filling classes Φ ⊂ 2Z × Π has elements
ϕ = (Zϕ , Πϕ ),

(9)

where Zϕ = {γ ∈ Z : πγ ∈ Πϕ }.
The set of paths P in Definition 8 may be either the set
of valid entanglement generation paths Pvalid , or a further
restriction to a set of allowed paths Pallowed .
Remark IV.1. The set of filling classes Φ are essentially
containers ϕ ∈ Φ for active PGTs, based on the cells of the
path partition Πϕ ∈ Π. The set of filling classes does not
need to be populated by PGTs, which means that Φ can be
created based on the path partition Π and an empty set of
PGTs Z = ∅. Once created, the set of filling classes may
be updated by populating the containers ϕ ∈ Φ with a set
of PGTs Z ̸= ∅.
To identify which resources are required by at least one
path in a filling class we introduce the mapping of associated resources between a set of paths and the set of
resources on at least one path in the set.

partition from the Network Manager via the NM:P interface and check for a change to the version id. In case of an
update to the path partition, the filling classes are rebuilt.
There may be one or more PGTs γ for which the path πγ is
no longer in the path partition. In that case, Update Filling Classes must apply a missing path rule. The default
missing path rule is to attempt to re-admit the demand
as an alternative PGT γ ′ realizing the demand, for which
πγ ′ is in the updated path partition. This may result in
an update the service agreement for the demand to reflect
the minimal allocation of the alternate PGT. If no alternate PGT can be admitted then Update Filling Classes
removes the PGT and updates the demand status to removed so that the Demand Manager can notify the end
nodes and cancel the service agreement.
Update Filling Classes is also responsible for removing
terminated or expired PGTs. To check for PGT terminations, the Network Scheduler reads the termination buffer
τ from the Demand Manager via the DM:B interface. Every PGT is checked and those for which there is a termination message or the expiry time has been reached are
removed from their filling class.
The full process Update Filling Classes is described by
Algorithm 4, UpdateFillingClasses in Appendix B.

Definition 9 (Associated Resources). Let P be a set of
paths and let R be the set of resources which are on some IV.iii.b. Admit Tasks
path in P. Let {πx }x ⊂ P. The resources
associated

with {πx }x are indicated by ξ {πx }x , as defined by the The process Admit Tasks is described in full by Algo-′
rithm 5, AdmitTasks in Appendix B. It tests PGTs γ
following mapping:
in the task intake buffer Γ to determine whether there is
P
R
ξ:2 →2
(10) sufficient time available to schedule a minimum allocation
SI
{πx }x 7→ {r ∈ R : ∃π ∈ {πx }x s.t. r ∈ π}.
(11) Nγ of PGAs in subsequent scheduling intervals without
disrupting service to any active PGTs. Before testing any
new PGTs γ ′ ∈ Γ, it calculates the time required to schedIV.iii.a. Update Filling Classes
ule a minimum allocation of each active PGT and reduces
In every scheduling interval, the first process that the the available time on all resources associated with the
Network Scheduler does is Update Filling Classes. This PGTs filling class by this duration. The function Calcuprocess happens first, as both Admit Tasks and Compute lateRequiredTime, defined in Algorithm 2 implements
Schedule require the updated set of filling classes as input. this calculation. Recall that PGAs for a PGT γ must be
The Network Scheduler carries forward the filling classes scheduled for uninterrupted periods of duration Eγ on all
from a scheduling interval to the subsequent one. How- components in πγ . Gaps of time between PGAs of PGTs
ever, before proceeding it is necessary to retrieve the path in the same filling class are not treated as available time
12

Algorithm 2: Calculation of an upper bound on the minimum required time to schedule a minimum allocation
of PGAs NγSI for every PGT γ ∈ Zϕ in a filling class ϕ.
Function CalculateRequiredTime:
Input : Filling class ϕ = (Zϕ , Πϕ )
Output: Required time for filling class, R(Zϕ )
SI
Order PGTs γ ∈ Zϕ by a set of indices X = {1, · · · , |Zϕ |} such that NxSI ≤ Nx+1
;
Set M ← |Zϕ | ;
Set nϕ0 ← N0SI− 1;

 PM −1
Set cϕ0 ← max
max
Ey + tminsep
, y=0 Ey ;
y
y∈{0,···M −1}

for x ∈ {1, · · · , M − 1} do
SI
Set nϕx ← NxSI − Nx−1
;
Set cϕx ← max

max

y∈{x,···M −1}

 PM −1
Ey + tminsep
, y=x Ey
y



;

end
Set R(Zϕ ) ←

M
−1
P
x=0

(nϕx · cϕx + Ex ) ;

return R(Zϕ )
end

by Admit Tasks, because they may not be long enough to
allow a PGA to be scheduled. By reducing the available
time for all resources associated with a PGTs filling class,
rather than just for the resources on the PGTs path, Admit
Tasks avoids considering gaps between PGAs as available
time. This simplification prioritizes the satisfaction of service agreements, but it may induce an overestimation of
the required time and limit the number of accepted PGTs.
Incoming PGTs in the task intake buffer are organized
into sets Γd ∈ Γ by the demand they realize, with each
specific PGT γd′ ∈ Γd corresponding to a different path
between the end nodes. For each of these PGTs, Admit
Tasks repeats the calculation of CalculateRequiredTime with γd′ included in the filling class it would be in
(the filling class ϕ such that πγd′ ∈ Πϕ ). This required time
is compared to the duration of the scheduling interval. If
it is less than or equal to the scheduling interval the PGT
is accepted, the other PGTs in Γd are removed and the
demand status is set to accepted. Otherwise, the PGT is
rejected and Admit Tasks checks the next PGT γd′′ ∈ Γd ,
until either one is accepted or no alternatives remain – in
which case the demand status is set to rejected. If Admit Tasks accepts a particular PGT to realize a demand,
it fixes the path along which the demand will be served.
Hence Admit Tasks performs the function of routing.
IV.iii.c.

Compute Schedule

The Network Scheduler computes the network schedule for
all components of the network, including end nodes. The
schedules of network components are aligned such that a
PGA for the PGT γ with path πγ is added to the schedule of every component on the path πγ , so that the PGA
covers the same span of time in each component schedule.
Due to this alignment, it suffices to refer to a single network schedule S, although the schedule is actually a set of
individual schedules for each component of the network.
13

The Compute Schedule process is described by the function ComputeSchedule in Algorithm 3. It is a timecritical process that must compute a schedule including
a minimal allocation of PGAs (Definition 4) for every accepted PGT once per scheduling interval. This is essential
for satisfying the service agreements established with accepted demands (Definition 3). Hence, the computation
time must not exceed the scheduling interval. A secondary
aim of the Compute Schedule process is to minimize the
amount of idle time in which no PGAs are scheduled on
internal resources. It is divided into two phases: a minimal allocation phase which is time-critical and must be
completed by the end of a scheduling interval, and a subsequent bonus allocation phase which can be cut off at any
time without consequences for service agreements.
The minimal allocation phase relies on DirectAllocation, Algorithm 6 in Appendix B, which produces a
schedule for one filling class at a time. The DirectAllocation algorithm is fundamentally based on a modification of the classical Round Robin scheduling algorithm.
A schedule S is constructed by calculating a direct allocation schedule for each filling class ϕ ∈ Φ which includes
a minimal allocation of PGAs for every PGT γ ∈ Zϕ , and
sequentially inserting the direct allocation schedules into S
according to a partial ordering of ϕ ∈ Φ. A partial ordering of the filling classes ϕ ∈ Φ is specified in an implementation and derives from the path partition Π which determines the structure of Φ. The same logic underpins both
the DirectAllocation scheduling algorithm and the
CalculateRequiredTime function (Algorithm 2) from
the Admit Tasks process. CalculateRequiredTime essentially calculates the duration of a schedule that would
be produced by the DirectAllocation algorithm, which
actually adds PGAs to a network schedule. In this way,
Admit Tasks leverages insight into the Compute Schedule
process when determining which PGTs to admit.
The
bonus
allocation
phase
relies
Algo-

B
J1
J2
PGT ID
PGT 0
PGT 1
PGT 2
PGT 3
PGT 4
PGT 5
PGT 6

I1
I2
I3
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
E6
0

100

200

300

400

500

Time (s)

Figure 7: An example network schedule produced by ComputeSchedule for a simplified version of the dumbbell
topology network illustrated in Figure 1, with a six end nodes and seven active PGTs. End nodes E1−2 connect to
I1 , E3−4 connect to I2 , and E5−6 connect to I3 . The PGTs are configured as examples, with different values for their
minimal allocations, minimum separations between PGAs, and PGA durations. They are organized into the specific
filling classes defined in Section VI, so that ZϕB = {γ0 , γ6 }, ZϕJ1 = {γ5 , γ1 }, ZϕI1 = {γ3 }, ZϕI2 = {γ2 }, ZϕI3 = {γ4 }. Solid
(hatched) color boxes represent PGAs for PGTs of the matching color scheduled by the minimal (bonus) allocation
phases of Compute Schedule. The vertical blue dashed line indicates the end of the required time to schedule a minimal
allocation of PGAs for each PGT. The red vertical dashed line indicates the end of a scheduling interval.
is the number of active PGTs and R = |R| is the number of resources in the network. In contrast, the bonus
allocation phase has operational complexity O(N 3 R). In
the two phase system implemented by ComputeSchedule, the bonus allocation phase can be cut off by the end
of the scheduling interval without impacting demand service agreements. When the scheduling offset is set to two
scheduling intervals there is an entire scheduling interval
to distribute schedules (as in Figure 2) and it is possible to
cut off schedule computation arbitrarily close to the end
An example network schedule produced by Comof a scheduling interval.
puteSchedule is illustrated in Figure 7. This schedule is
for a simplified version of the dumbbell topology network
illustrated in Figure 1, with six end nodes instead of fif- IV.iv. Schedule Manager
teen. There are seven active PGTs in the example, config- The Schedule Manager control application stores the curured to have different values for their minimal allocations, rent and subsequent network schedules and formats the
minimum separations between PGAs, and PGA durations. component schedules for distribution. It offers two inThe solid (hatched) colored boxes represent PGAs sched- terfaces, the schedule distribution (SM:SD) interface and
uled during the minimal (bonus) allocation phase. The the schedule (SM:S) interface. The SM:SD interface is an
DirectAllocation schedule for each filling class has a internal interface which allows the Network Scheduler to
block like structure and may include gaps of time in which push new schedules to the schedule manager as they are
no PGAs are scheduled. These gaps of time carry for- computed. The SM:S interface is an external interface
ward into the minimal allocation part of the schedule S which allows network components to request the current
built from concatenated direct allocation schedules. In the or next schedule. The Schedule Manager consumes the Z
bonus allocation phase, additional PGAs are scheduled in interface with the central controller, enabling it to push
some of these gaps, improving the resource utilization and network schedules for distribution to components.
decreasing idle time.
rithm 7, RoundRobinBonus of Appendix B, which
is also based on a modification of the classical Round
Robin scheduling algorithm. In this phase Compute
Schedule passes again through the schedule constructed
during the minimal allocation phase, and wherever possible schedules additional PGAs. This decreases the idle
time of each resource in the network, as well as decreasing
the expected time to generate all Ndinst packets of each
accepted demand d.

The time complexity of the Compute Schedule process
V. Performance Analysis
motivates the division of the process into the minimal and
bonus allocation phases. In Appendix D we prove that an Upholding the service agreement that Arqon establishes
implementation of the minimal allocation phase has op- for each accepted demand (Definition 3) is essential to
erational complexity O(N R) + O(N 2 ), where N = |ZΦ | ensure the delivery of reliable service. Here we develop
14

theorem is non-trivial and relies upon many intermediate
results, each of which is stated and proved in Appendix C.
The statement requires the set of filling classes to be wellbehaved. This property, defined formally in Appendix C,
means that a method of comparison between filling classes
can be defined consistently based on the resources associated with the filling classes.

Algorithm 3: Overall scheduling algorithm for
creating network schedules. DirectAllocation
and RoundRobinBonus are respectively as in Algorithms 6 and 7 in Appendix B.
Function MinimalAllocation:
Input : Set of Filling Classes Φ, network
schedule S
Output: Updated network schedule S.
for ϕ ∈ Φ do
SP
= DirectAllocation(ϕ, S, t0 +
′
ϕ′ <ϕ R(Zϕ ));
end
end
Function BonusAllocation:
Input : Set of Filling Classes Φ, network
schedule S
Output: Updated network schedule S.
for ϕ ∈ Φ do
S = RoundRobinBonus(ϕ, S);
end
end
Function ComputeSchedule:
Input : Set of Filling classes Φ
Output: Compiled Schedule S̃
Initialise new empty schedule S;
Set S ← MinimalAllocation(Φ, S);
Set S ← BonusAllocation(Φ, S);
end

Theorem V.2 (Minimal Allocation is guaranteed).
Let d be a demand accepted by Arqon as the PGT
γd . Suppose πγd ∈ Π in every relevant scheduling interval. Suppose Φ is a well-behaved set of filling classes.
Then, in every relevant scheduling interval the schedule
S = ComputeSchedule(Φ) contains at least NγSI
PGAs
d
of the PGT γd . Moreover, the duration of S does not exceed T SI .
Proof: Theorem V.1. To satisfy the service agreement it
is necessary that
1. The schedule is computed before the end of each relevant scheduling interval;
2. The schedule is retrieved successfully by every component on πγd in every relevant scheduling interval;
3. The schedule contains at least NγSI
PGAs of the PGT
d
γd .
4. The duration of the schedule S does not exceed the
duration of one scheduling interval T SI .

the performance analysis of Arqon , by stating and proving results which qualify the operating conditions under
which Arqon is guaranteed to satisfy these service agreements. As a supplement to these results, we motivate the
connection between satisfaction of service agreements and
successful execution of quantum network applications by
end nodes. We prove that satisfaction of a service agreement for a demand d with service error parameter ϵservice
d
translates into end nodes successfully generating all packets of pairs required to execute their targeted application
).
with probability at least (1 − ϵservice
d
We define relevant scheduling intervals as those that are
relevant to the satisfaction of the service agreement.

Property 4. ensures that no schedules overruns the
scheduling interval, which would prevent complete execution of the schedule for the subsequent scheduling interval. In the hypothesis, it is assumed that 1. and 2. hold.
Properties 3. and 4. are guaranteed by Theorem V.2, a
full proof of which is given in Appendix C.
An application session succeeds if N inst instances of the
quantum application are successfully executed by the end
nodes which register it. For this to be possible, at least
N inst packets of end-to-end links must be successfully generated. In this way, application success hinges upon the
receipt of minimal service.

Definition 11 (Minimal service). Recall from Definition 2 that a demand d from an application session on end
Definition 10 (Relevant scheduling intervals). The rel- nodes specifies at least N inst packets to be generated. We
d
evant scheduling intervals for an accepted demand d are say that an application session achieves minimal service
those between tstart
and the scheduling interval in which if at least N inst packets of end-to-end links are successfully
d
d
the demand is either terminated or expires.
generated before the demand’s expiry time.

Theorem V.1 (Deterministic Satisfaction of Service
Agreements). Let d be a demand accepted by Arqon as
the PGT γd . Suppose the path partition Π remains static
in all relevant scheduling intervals for d and that every
component on the path πγd retrieves each network schedule before its start time. Then, Arqon deterministically
satisfies the service agreement for demand d.
To prove Theorem V.1, which is our main performance
result, we first state the following theorem, a proof of
which is given in Appendix C. The proof of the following
15

Lemma V.3. Let d be a demand accepted as a PGT γd for
which Arqon satisfies the service agreement. Suppose all
nodes on the path πγd attempt all scheduled PGAs. Then,
the application session which submitted d achieves minimal service with probability at least (1 − ϵservice
).
d
Proof. (Lemma V.3) By the hypothesis, the service agreement for demand d is satisfied and all nodes on the path
πγd of the PGT γ realizing the demand attempt all scheduled PGAs. Let x be the total number of packets generated for d as a result of the PGAs attempted. There

are two possible scenarios in which a service agreement
is satisfied: the demand is either terminated or expires.
We are only concerned with demands that expire. If d
was terminated, then we may assume that either Ndinst
packets were successfully generated and the application
session achieved minimum service, or the application session instance was canceled for some reason unknown to the
central controller – in which case the service agreement is
also terminated. It follows from the Definition 4 of the
minimal allocation that if NγSI
PGAs are attempted in
d
expiry
SI
start
each of n = ⌈(td
− td )/T SI ⌉ scheduling intervals,
then the number x of successfully generated packets satisfies x ≥ Ndinst with probability at least (1 − ϵservice
).
d

VI.

Implementation

We have developed a particular implementation of Arqon
written in Python [6] that is designed to enable configurable simulations of realistic networks.
We define a family of network topologies that adheres
to a set of physically motivated principles and limit the
scope of our implementation to this family of networks.
Crucially, our implementation includes the specification
of a set of allowed paths Pallowed , a specification of the
path partition Π, and the specific choice of filling classes
Φ induced by Π. The specific choice of filling classes thus
defined has the property of being well-behaved, ensuring
compatibility with the performance results in Section V.
To enable numeric evaluations of heterogeneous networks from within this family, with a diverse range of
entanglement generation capabilities, we implement a
method of generating a network capabilities table which
relies on input parameters for mean and standard deviations of the entanglement generation rate and fidelity on
fixed length paths, and an scaling calculation based on the
length of end-to-end paths.
The full details of our implementation are provided by
our open source simulator and its documentation [6]. Here
we highlight key features, particularly those that are relevant to the numeric evaluations in Section VIII.
VI.i.

End Nodes

Quantum Computing (BQC) [3, 18], quantum teleportation [9, 53], or any of these applications combined with entanglement purification [35, 10]. We derive the minimum
entanglement fidelity and number of pairs requirements
from resources [1, 32, 53, 53, 35]. We treat teleportation
type applications as test-applications, which may be used
to validate near term quantum network deployments. For
this reason, we simply require an entanglement fidelity of
greater than 0.5 for teleportation, which is the classical
bound.
VI.ii.a.

Assigning Applications

Each application we define in [6] specifies critical information required to produce a valid demand. In particular
this includes the (minimum) window duration w. For real
end nodes, the maximum memory lifetimes of qubits will
affect which application programs can be supported, as
these set hard upper bounds for window durations. Application programs don’t have an inherent window. In a
deployed setting, the local runtime of an end node must set
a window based not only on qubit memory lifetimes but
also on the duration of time in which a generated packet
must remain in memory when executing an instance of the
application program. We define a minimum window for an
application based on an estimate of how long exemplary
quantum hardware may require to execute an application
instance. We model the quantum hardware of end nodes
based on either the NV center in diamond [48, 22, 40,
78] or trapped ion platforms [27, 15, 67, 63]. We use data
from [78] for the NV platform and from [63] for the trapped
ion platform to set the memory lifetimes of individual end
nodes to currently experimentally achievable lifetimes in a
networked setting (i.e. memory lifetime while simultaneously attempting entanglement generation). Then, when
randomly assigning applications to end nodes, we ensure
that the memory lifetime of the end node can support the
requirements of the application.
In a deployment, some end nodes may be operated as
server nodes, for example for serving BQC applications,
where less powerful end nodes may be the requesting
clients. To support such use cases, we implement a registration of end nodes as either discoverable or not. Practically, a server should be discoverable. When assigning
applications, we use use this discoverable property as a
proxy for a node being a server or a client. We only assign
applications between two clients, or between a client and
a server.
By mocking these constraints when assigning applications to end nodes, we are effectively replicating some of
the behaviors of capability negotiation, without fully implementing such a protocol.

Our implementation is not intended to provide a detailed
simulation of end nodes. However, we implement a simple
physically motivated model for assigning applications to
end nodes and configuring application demands, and we
implement demand submission and termination behaviors
of end nodes because they are critical for simulating Arqon. In a deployed network, user input will determine
which applications an end node runs. We define a set of
realistic quantum network applications and implement a
method of assigning these applications to end nodes [6].
VI.ii.b.

Demand Submission

For each application assigned to an end node, we draw the
initial demand submission time from a Uniform[0, texpiry
)
rel
start
expiry
We define a dictionary of possible applications [6] based distribution, where texpiry
=
t
+
t
is
the
relative
rel
on minimum fidelity and number of entangled pair require- expiry time. This ensures that the initial demand submisments of Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) [41, 8], Blind sions are not all clustered together around the start of a
VI.ii.

Applications

16

simulation and mocks the demand submission process by node (v ∈ J), or a long-distance backbone (v ∈ B). Thereindependent end nodes. Thereafter, whenever a demand fore, the set of vertices V in the network resource graph is
obtains minimal service (and is then terminated), expires a disjoint union of component types,
or is removed from the network, a new demand is submitV = E ⊔ I ⊔ J ⊔ B.
(13)
ted time Exponential(tresubmit ) later, where the value of
tresubmit , the average resubmission time, is set separately
To further define a family of internallyconnected netfor each application source assigned to an end node.
works we introduce a constraint on the V2 possible edges
to a set of allowed edges, denoted E ∗ . The definition of
VI.iii. Creating Packet Generation Tasks
allowed edges is based on three principles:
To create a PGT γd for a demand d there needs to be a
1. An EGI is always needed for entanglement generation
method of calculating Eγd , the execution time of a PGA
between two nodes with entanglement generation capacket
for γd , pγd , the packet generation probability for a
pabilities [13, 58].
PGA of duration Eγ , and NγSI
, the minimum allocation of
d
PGAs for γd . These calculations depend on the demand
2. Entanglement swapping must always be mediated by
parameters, the service error parameter ϵservice
, and the
a node that has at least one qubit with entanglement
d
rate of successful entanglement generation along the path
generation capabilities and an additional qubit with
πγd of γd . In our implementation ϵservice
is a configurable
some memory capabilities [38, 17, 78, 94].
d
parameter set by the central controller and the same value
3. Long-distance backbones always own a private set of
is used for every demand d.
EGIs, both internally to the long-distance backbone,
To calculate possible values of Eγd for a PGT γd we use
as well as at the end points where they are exposed
approximations by Naus from [72] for the probability of k
to other network components [38, 80, 81, 83, 63].
successes in a window w given a rate of average successes
λ. For a specified rate of entanglement generation success,
The set of edges E in a network resource graph must be
these approximations are used to calculate possible pairs a subset of the set of allowed edges, E ⊆ E ∗ . Informally,
packet
for a PGT γd as in the following types of edges are allowed: (e, i), (i, j), (j, b),
Eγd and pγd . To calculate NγSI
d
Definition 4 we use Hoeffding’s inequality [52]. This cal- where e ∈ E, i ∈ I, j ∈ J, b ∈ B and allowed edges are
culation depends on the value of ppacket
. See Appendix E reflexive, so that (e, i) is an allowed edge means that also
γd
for more information about the calculation of Eγ based (i, e) is an allowed edge. A formal definition of the set
on ppacket , and [6] for the Python implementation of these E ∗ of allowed edges is stated in Appendix E. For details
calculations.
on generating random network topologies from within this
We set the final values for Eγ , ppacket
, and NγSI based family of networks, see [6].
γ
on the solution of


Definition 12 (Local Area). Let G = (V, E) be a network
packet
SI
minsep
pγd
= argmin Nγd (p) Eγd (p) + tγd
.
(12) resource graph, and B the set of long-distance backbones.
p
Let EB = {(e1 , e2 ) ∈ E | e1 , e2 ∈ B} and EB = E \ EB . Let
The quantity minimized in (12) captures a notion of how
much load will be placed on the network by accepting the
PGT. The calculation therefore optimizes the selection of
ppacket for the value that minimizes the load.
VI.iv.

GB := (V \ B, EB )

Network Topology

We specify a set of physically motivated constraints on the
network resource graph which define a family of networks.
These constraints help to ensure that the network topology
of any network we simulate represents a physically realizable quantum network. In a deployment of Arqon these
constraints will be replaced by simple input of the actual
network topology and the logical connections present in
the network. If a deployed network is also an element of
our broad family of networks, then it may be equipped
with Pallowed and Π as in our implementation.

(14)

be the subgraph of G formed by removing every longdistance backbone vertex and corresponding edges. Then
the local areas of G are the (maximal) internally connected sub-components of GB . The set of local areas is
denoted L.
The concept of a local area is introduced to aid in describing the scale of a quantum network. Local areas induce a structure on the network resource graph such that
it can be decomposed into the graph GB and a graph GC
which contains only local areas and long distance backbones. The graph GC captures the local area connectivity
of G.
VI.v.

Path Computation

The set of allowed paths Pallowed ⊂ Pvalid is a restriction
on the set of valid entanglement generation paths. In ApThe first constraint we impose is to consider only inter- pendix E we formally define Pallowed following a construcnally connected network resource graphs (Definition 5). tion which minimizes the number of long-distance backEvery network component v ∈ V is uniquely identified as bones traversed, rather than strictly minimizing the abeither an end node (v ∈ E), an EGI (v ∈ I), a junction solute number of hops in a path. This construction is
VI.iv.a.

Network Resource Graph

17

motivated by the expectation that a relatively large loss
For any network schedule in which a PGT γ cannot
of entanglement generation success rate will result from reach the termination criteria of obtaining minimal sertraversing of a long-distance backbone, as compared to vice (i.e. less PGAs are scheduled than the remaining intraversing multiple hops within a local area [28, 63, 80].
stances to execute), we determine the number of packets
generated by drawing from a Binomial distribution with
Definition 13 (Specific choice of path partition). Let probability of success ppacket . Otherwise, we sample from
γ
G = (V, E) be an internally connected resource graph and a Bernoulli distribution with probability of success ppacket
γ
let E ⊆ E ∗ . Let L = {Li = (Vi , Ei )} be the set of local ar- for each PGA in turn. This two-stage approach allows
eas of G. Let Ji = J ∩ Vi be the junction nodes in sub- us to minimize the time required to simulate execution of
graph Li . Denote by π = (π1 , π2 , · · · ) a path π with ver- network schedules, while still allowing accurate reporting
tices πi ∈ V.
of when minimal service is obtained.
We define the partition Π of Pallowed in the following
manner:

VII.

ΠB = {π ∈ Pallowed : ∃k s.t. πk ∈ B}

Complexity Analysis

Arqon must produce a new network schedule every
scheduling interval, with a total computation time not
exceeding the scheduling interval. To validate that this
j∈J
is feasible, we analyze the operational complexity of our
where Pallowed is as defined Appendix E, Definition 24.
implementation of the Network Scheduler control application. Our operational complexity analysis is based on
determining which fundamental operations, such as value
Lemma VI.1.
assignment, list insertion, list appending, list sorting, etc.
Π = {ΠB } ∪ {Πj }j∈J ∪ {Πi }i∈I ,
(15) occur in the implementations of our algorithms, as in Listings 1-8 in Appendix F. For each fundamental operation,
where ΠB , ΠJj ∀j, and ΠIi ∀i are as in Definition 13, is a
such as value assignment, we determine the time comdisjoint partition of Pallowed .
plexity of the operation, for example: value assignment
is O(1). We therefore calculate the time complexity of
Proof. See Appendix E.
our algorithms based on the number of operations of each
type, and the time complexity of each type of operation.
VI.vi. Network Capabilities
The details of our analysis are given in Appendix D.
The network capabilities manager populates the network
VII.1. The complete program Netcapabilities table using a simple heuristic model when the Theorem
workScheduler
has operational complexity
network is initialized. Our implementation does not in

clude dynamic update handling for the capabilities of net
R
2
2
3
O
k2
(N
+
k)
+
R
+
(N
+
R)
+
N
R
,
(17)
work components or paths through the network. See [6]
for full details of the model.
where R = |R| is the number of internal resources in the
network, N = |ZΦ | is the number of active PGTs, and
VI.vii. Filling Classes
k = |Γ| is the number of PGTs in the task intake object.
The properties of the set of filling classes are directly inherited from the specific choice of path partition, which Proof. The program NetworkScheduler consists of
defines their structure (Definition 13). The specific choice the program sequence UpdateFillingClasses, AdmitTasks, and ComputeSchedule. By Lemma D.8 Upof filling classes can be written as
dateFillingClasses has operational complexity
Φ = {ΦB } ∪ {ΦJj }j∈J ∪ {ΦIi }i∈I .
(16)
O((N + R)2 ).
(18)
In Appendix E we prove that this specific choice of filling
By Theorem D.10 AdmitTasks has operational complexclasses has the property of being well-behaved.
ity



R
2
O
k2
(N
+
k)
+
R
.
(19)
VI.viii. Execution of Network Schedules
ΠJj = {π ∈ Pallowed \ Πb : ∃k s.t. πk ∈ Jj },
∀j ∈ J
[ J
I
Πi = {π ∈ Pallowed \ (Πb ∪
Πj ) : ∃k s.t. πk = i}, ∀i ∈ I,

Since we do not implement a detailed model of end nodes,
in our implementation we mock the execution of network
schedules by sampling random variables to determine how
many PGAs successfully generate packets. We then assume that whenever a packet is generated as the result
of a PGA, then the corresponding application instance is
successfully executed. Our implementation does include
session termination behavior in which end nodes terminate application sessions after they have obtained minimal
service.
18

The program ComputeSchedule consists of a minimal
allocation phase, a bonus allocation phase, and a schedule compilation phase. The minimal allocation phase contributes (Lemma D.12)
O(N R) + O(N 2 )

(20)

to the operational complexity. The bonus allocation phase
contributes (Lemma D.13)
O(N 3 R).

(21)

(22)

Overall, the program NetworkScheduler has operational complexity,



O k2R (N + k)2 + R + (N + R)2 + O(N 3 R).

Our implementation of the Network Scheduler has an
operational time complexity with a polynomial dependency on the number of active PGTs N and the size of
the task intake buffer k. However, there is an exponential
dependence on the number of resources in the network,
R. In a deployment, the number of resources is expected
to be relatively static, and will typically act as a constant
factor in the operational complexity of the Network Scheduler. Nevertheless, the exponential dependence on R does
indicate that Arqon is best suited for networks in which
R < 1000. This result conforms with the heuristic expectation that distributed control architectures are more
suitable than centrally controlled network architectures for
very large networks [5].

VIII.

Evaluation

Arqon is designed to deliver reliable service, according to
reliability requirements (R1)-(R4). The first requirement,
(R1) is satisfied by design, as all demands receive accept/reject messages from the demand manager within two
scheduling intervals following their registration [6]. By
Theorem VII.1, which captures the overall operational
complexity of the Network Scheduler control application,
it is expected that network schedules can always be computed in time to be delivered. Then, by Theorem V.1, it
is expected that Arqon satisfies requirements (R2)-(R4)
as long as the path partition Π remains static throughout an evaluation. However, from the perspective of a
network operator, there remain several relevant questions
regarding the manner in which reliable service is delivered,
including the following.

1.0010

20

1.0005

15

1.0000

10
5

0.9995
7

10 s

0.9990

0
0

200

400
Time (hours)

600

Number of Active PGTs (a.u.)

O(N 3 R).

Proportion of Accepted Demands
Which Obtain Minimum Service (a.u.)

Compiling the resulting schedule contributes only O(N R)
(Lemma D.14). The total operational complexity of ComputeSchedule is therefore dominated by the bonus allocation phase and is given by Theorem D.15 as

800

Figure 8: Proportion of accepted demands which obtain
minimal service (left, blue) and the number of active
PGTs (right, orange), compared to the time at which the
scheduling interval occurs. The scheduling interval duration 30 minutes and the data corresponds to a simulated
10 weeks of continuous network operation. Shaded regions
show 1 standard deviation of the mean.
In this section we first validate that Arqon delivers reliable service on static network topologies and then address these questions, which capture additional performance metrics. Finally, we validate our operational complexity analysis of the Network Scheduler with thorough
numeric evaluations that supply concrete time values for
computation times in a variety of parameter regimes.
In all simulations, the demands for service submitted by
pairs of end nodes are based on the real minimum fidelity
requirements of BQC (2, 6, or 10 qubit) [32, 53], e91 based
QKD [1], teleportation [53], or any of these applications
pre-pended by purification following the DEJMPS protocol [35] of the bipartite entangled pairs. The other parameters of each demand, such as the number of pairs and
the window duration are set based on the application and
the network capabilities database for that simulation [6].
Lists of the applications simulated in each simulation are
included as JSON files in [6].
VIII.i.

Service Reliability

To meet the reliability requirements (R2)-(R4), Arqon
must satisfy demands before their deadlines and the arrival of new demands must not disrupt service to already
accepted demands. A demand is satisfied when its associ(Q1) What effect does the service error parameter ϵservice
ated application session achieves minimal service (Definihave on the service delivered?
tion 11). By Lemma V.3, if the service agreement for a
(Q2) How quickly does Arqon satisfy service agreements, demand d is satisfied, then the corresponding application
session achieves minimal service with at least probability
relative to demand expiry times?
(1 − ϵservice
).
d
(Q3) What impact does the bonus allocation phase of the
We validate that Arqon delivers reliable service first
Compute Schedule process of the Network Scheduler with simulations of a network with the dumbbell topology
have on the service delivered?
illustrated in Figure 1, and with ϵservice = 1e − 5 for all
(Q4) What proportion of submitted demands are accepted? demands. Then, we validate that the reliability of service
delivery is not conditional on a specific network topology
(Q5) What impact does the specific choice of filling classes or number of demand sources by simulating random net(16) have on which of the registered PGTs are ac- work topologies from the family of networks defined in
cepted by Admit Tasks?
Section VI.
19

VIII.i.a.

Dumbbell Topology Network

We simulate one thousand randomly seeded runs, each
corresponding to 846 hours (1694 half hour scheduling intervals) of continuous operation of the dumbbell topology
network in Figure 1. In every run, applications are assigned to 80% of all possible end node pairings connected
by a route in ΠIi ∀i ∈ I, 10% of all end node pairings connected by a route in ΠJj ∀j ∈ J, and 10% of all end node
pairings connected by a route in ΠB . As long as at least
one of the nodes assigned the application is ‘not discoverable’ (see Section VI), then the application session submits
demands for service. These simulations included an average of 18 demand sources, with the (static) number per
simulation ranging from 3 to 26.
Figure 8 shows how two metrics vary over time for the
dumbbell topology simulations: (1) the proportion of accepted demands that obtain minimal service, and (2) the
number of active PGTs at any given time. For the minimal service proportion metric, time corresponds to when
each demand was accepted as a particular PGT. Across
all one thousand simulation runs, a total of 180,662 accepted demands reached their expiry times. With the
stringent value of ϵservice = 1e−5 used in these simulations,
Lemma V.3 predicts that at most 2 accepted demands
should fail to obtain minimal service. The simulation
results confirm this expected behavior: all accepted demands obtained minimal service (proportion = 1.0, standard deviation = 0).These outcomes validate that the service delivered satisfies reliability requirements (R2) and
(R3).
The variation in the number of active PGTs over time
enables validating that arriving demands do not disrupt
service to already accepted demands (R4). Starting from
network initialization at time zero, pairs of end nodes begin submitting demands and some of these are accepted as
specific PGTs by Admit Tasks. In these simulations, the
time at which different end node pairs submit their first
demand is uniformly distributed over the first 107 seconds
of network operation. This process results in the number
of PGTs to schedule increasing over time, before reaching
a steady state average of 15.5 PGTs after about 278 hours
(107 seconds) of continuous operation. The ramp-up in
the number of PGTs to schedule has no impact on the proportion of demands obtaining minimal service, confirming
that (R4) is satisfied.
VIII.i.b.

Random Network Topologies

The random topologies we simulate are parameterized in
Table 1 by the number of long-distance backbones, the
number of local areas, and the number of end nodes in the
network. For each parameterization, we randomly generate ten network topologies and then, we simulate ten
randomly seeded runs for every topology. Every run corresponds to 757 hours (1514 half hour scheduling intervals)
of continuous operation. In every run we assign application sessions to 20% of all possible end node pairings connected by a route in ΠIi ∀i ∈ I, 15% of end node pairings
connected by a route in ΠJj ∀j ∈ J, and 5% of end node
20

Long-distance
Backbones

Local Areas

End Nodes

1
2
2
2
2
3
5
6
7
12

2
2
2
3
3
3
4
3
5
4

15
15
50
30
50
30
40
35
50
40

Table 1: Parametrization of the randomly generated
topologies simulated.
pairings connected by a route in ΠB .
To address (Q1) and study the impact of different values
for the ϵservice parameter, we perform each simulation with
five different settings:
ϵservice ∈ {1e − 5, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 0.5}.
In Table 2 we record the proportion of accepted demands
which obtain minimal service, which is always greater than
the lower bound of (1 − ϵservice ) predicted by Lemma V.3.
These results validate that Arqon delivers reliable service
for a wide range of network topologies and number of demand sources.
VIII.ii.

Additional Performance Metrics

The average values of performance metrics addressing (Q1)-(Q3) are reported in Table 2. To characterize the
impact of the bonus allocation phase of Compute Schedule, we disabled this feature and repeated all simulations
of randomly generated network topologies with the same
random seeds as in the simulations with default Arqon.
The total proportion of accepted demands which obtain
minimal service in these simulations was always > 99%,
both with and without the bonus allocation phase. This
outcome persisted even when ϵservice was relaxed to the
very high value of 0.5, which Lemma V.3 predicts to allow
up to 50% of demands to fail to obtain minimal service.
These results indicate that Arqon over-serves accepted
demands, as compared to the service error parameter
ϵservice . As this effect persists when the bonus allocation phase is disabled, we trace the cause of this excess
service to how Arqon calculates the minimal allocation
for each demand (Definition 4), which has proven to be
a large overestimate. Application sessions on end nodes
may benefit from over-service of accepted demands, but
wider network performance metrics such as the proportion of accepted demands may suffer from over-service to
demands. In an alternate implementation, this may be
addressed by replacing the method which solves the the
system of equations determining the minimal allocation
with a weaker solution that determines smaller values for
the minimal allocation.

20

107 s
paccepted = 0.15

0.8

15
0.6
10
0.4
5

0.2
0.0

0

200

400
Time (hours)

600

800

Number of Active PGTs (a.u.)

Proportion of Submitted Demands
Accepted (a.u.)

1.0

0

Figure 9: Proportion of submitted demands which are accepted at a specific time (left, blue) and the number of active PGTs (right, orange) over time. Application sessions
are first created at times that are uniformly distributed
over the first 107 s of network operation, emphasized by
the vertical black dotted line. The horizontal dashed blue
line indicates the average of the points after the black dotted line.
Arqon schedules a minimal allocation of PGAs for all
active PGTs in every scheduling interval, regardless of
whether or not the expected number of successfully generated packets,
E[# successful PGAs] = N PGAs scheduled × ppacket (23)
already exceeds the number of required successes (N inst ).
To prevent over-serving demands, an alternate implementation may decrease the minimal allocation for PGTs following the scheduling interval in which (23) exceeds N inst .
The data in Table 2 also addresses (Q2) and (Q3).
(Q2): Arqon satisfies service agreements for accepted demands significantly in advance of demand expiry
times. This is true for all ϵservice values simulated and
remains true if the bonus allocation phase of Compute
Schedule is disabled.
(Q3): The bonus allocation phase significantly impacts how
quickly an accepted demand obtains minimum service, relative to its expiry time. The mean service to
expiry time more than doubles when the bonus allocation phase is disabled.
Approximately half of all PGAs scheduled by Arqon
are scheduled by the bonus allocation phase of Compute Schedule, regardless of the value of ϵservice . This
proportion directly accounts for the speedup of the
service to expiry time introduced by this phase.

VIII.ii.a.

demands may translate into long wait times to receive a
service agreement, a result of demands needing to be resubmitted multiple times.
For simulations of the Dumbbell topology network, Figure 9 plots the average proportion of submitted demands
that are accepted by Admit Tasks per scheduling interval
and the number of active PGTs in each scheduling interval. The proportion of demands accepted as some particular PGT decreases as a function of the number of active
PGTs. It reaches a steady state value of 0.15 after 107 s,
after which time all application sessions have submitted
at least one demand. When demands are rejected, terminated, or expire, application sessions on end nodes submit
new demands following a Poisson process with a session
specific resubmission rate.
For the simulations of randomly generated network
topologies, the average proportion of demands accepted
and the proportion of demands which pass demand registration, both with default Arqon and with the bonus allocation phase of Compute Schedule disabled are recorded in
Table 3. With default Arqon, for all values of ϵservice simulated the average proportion of demands accepted was
between 0.12 and 0.22. In contrast, the proportion of
demands which passed Demand Registration always exceeded 0.98. Therefore, almost all rejected demands are
rejected by Admit Tasks rather than be Demand Registration. With bonus allocation disabled, the average proportion of demands accepted decreased by at least 0.036
for every simulated value of ϵservice , and by up to 0.073 for
ϵservice = 0.5.
In all simulations (dumbbell topology and random network topologies), the average proportion of demands accepted is low. This indicates that the average load on the
network in our simulations is similar to the maximum supportable load calculated by Admit Tasks. Combined with
the results from Table 2 which indicate Arqon over-serves
accepted demands, we expect that the acceptance criterion of Admit Tasks is more stringent than is necessary
to satisfy reliability requirement (R4). An alternate implementation of Arqon may modify the function CalculateRequiredTime, with which AdmitTasks calculates
the time required to schedule a minimal allocation of all
active PGTs. A possible modification would be to omit
from the calculation any accepted PGTs γ for which the
expected number of successfully generated packets (23),
already exceeds the required number, Nγinst .
VIII.ii.b.

Proportion of Demands Accepted

The proportion of submitted demands that are accepted,
the subject of (Q4), is a performance metric that captures
information about the load on a network relative to the
tolerance of Arqon’s admission control algorithm (Admit
Tasks). It is a metric that directly impacts application
sessions on end nodes, as a low proportion of accepted
21

Profiling Accepted PGTs

To address (Q5) Figure 10 plots the number of submitted PGTs (Figure 10a) and the number of accepted PGTs
(Figure 10b) in each filling class. There is one data point
for each scheduling interval, for each network topology parameterization in Table 1. Data points are averages over
the ten random topologies generated from each parameterization and the randomly seeded simulations for each
topology.
The number of active PGTs in one filling class can impact the proportion of PGTs admitted to another filling
class because Admit Tasks reserves time for active PGTs

ϵservice

Mean Proportion of Accepted Demands
Which Obtain Minimal Service

Mean Service
to Expiry Time

Mean Proportion of PGAs
Scheduled in Bonus Allocation

Default Arqon: Bonus Allocation Enabled in Compute Schedule

1e-05
0.001
0.01
0.1
0.5

1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.9998

0.3706
0.3777
0.3809
0.3847
0.3837

0.4950
0.5279
0.5382
0.5386
0.5423

with Bonus Allocation Disabled in Compute Schedule

1e-05
0.001
0.01
0.1
0.5

1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.9998
0.9956

0.7481
0.8194
0.8483
0.8639
0.8646

0
0
0
0
0

Table 2: Additional performance metrics addressing (Q1)-(Q3) from simulations of the randomly generated network
topologies parameterized in Table 1.
ϵservice

Total proportion of
Demands Accepted

Total Proportion of
Registered Demands Accepted

Total Proportion of Demands
which Pass Demand Registration

Default Arqon: Bonus Allocation Enabled in Compute Schedule

1e-05
0.001
0.01
0.1
0.5

0.127
0.123
0.102
0.120
0.211

1e-05
0.001
0.01
0.1
0.5

0.073
0.087
0.042
0.055
0.138

0.131
0.128
0.105
0.123
0.222

0.992
0.991
0.993
0.993
0.984

with Bonus Allocation Disabled in Compute Schedule

0.077
0.096
0.047
0.069
0.155

0.992
0.986
0.991
0.982
0.977

Table 3: The total proportion of demands registered and accepted as particular PGTs, addressing (Q4), in simulations
of the randomly generated network topologies parametrized in Table 1.
on the resources associated with their filling classes. In our
implementation of Arqon, we employ the specific choice of
filling classes (16) derived from the path partition in Definition 13. In this path partition, all paths which contain
at least one long-distance backbone are in the same cell of
the partition. For network topologies with a large number
of local areas and long-distance backbones, the result is
that PGTs with paths between only two local areas are in
the same filling class as PGTs with paths between multiple
local areas.
In Figure 10 there is some clustering of the registered
PGTs (Figure 10a) based on the number of local areas in
the network parameterization. In contrast, after Admit
Tasks (Figure 10b) there is clear clustering of the active
PGTs based on the unique network topology parameterization, with ten data groupings visible in each subfigure,
each corresponding to one of the ten distinct network parameterizations.
22

For all network parameterizations simulated, the number of registered PGTs in a junction (ΦJj ∀j ∈ J) or interface (ΦIi ∀i ∈ I) filling class increases nearly monotonically with the number of registered PGTs in the backbone
filling class (Figure 10a). Similarly, the number of registered PGTs in an interface filling class increases nearly
monotonically with the number of registered PGTs in a
junction filling class. The relative number of PGTs registered in each filling class derives immediately from the
simulation configuration, which sets the number of application sessions between end nodes connected by routes in
interface, junction, and backbone filling classes. After Admit Tasks (Figure 10b), there remains a nearly monotonic
increase in the number of active PGTs in an interface filling class with the number of accepted PGTs in a junction
filling class. In contrast, the numbers of active PGTs in a
junction or interface filling class relative to the number in
the backbone filling class indicate a different relationship.

The number of PGTs accepted to the backbone filling class
inhibit acceptance of PGTs to both junction and interface
filling classes. To combat this effect an alternate implementation of Arqon may define a path partition which
sub-divides the backbone cell of the partition ΠB based
on the number of local areas traversed by a path.

by Algorithm 6, contributes O(N R)+O(N 2 ) and contains
no branching. The total number of operations depends on
N , but not on particular PGT characteristics. The resulting network schedule may contain gaps during which
no PGAs are scheduled, as illustrated in Figure 7. The
bonus allocation phase, implemented by Algorithm 7 attempts to fill these gaps. It contributes O(N 3 R), which
dominates the overall complexity. Its branching behavior
VIII.iii. Numerical Complexity Analysis
depends non-trivially on the number and duration of gaps,
In every simulation conducted, Arqon was able to compute the execution times Eγ (∀γ ∈ ZΦ ) of PGAs that may be
the network schedule much faster than the cutoff time for added, and the minimum separation tminsep
(∀γ ∈ ZΦ ) beγ
schedule distribution (tcompute ≪ T SI ). The average time tween PGAs of each PGT.
to produce a network schedule for each of the random
To illustrate this branching behavior, we consider a spetopologies simulated is recorded in Table 5 in Appendix D. cific set of PGTs (ZΦ∗ ) with the following structure:
The maximum of the average times required to produce
• the first PGT γ0 has tminsep
= 200 seconds, and all
a network schedule was less than 0.25 seconds (tcompute ),
γ0
other PGTs γi , i > 0 have tminsep
= 0;
whereas the duration of the scheduling interval was 1800
γi
seconds (T SI ).
• Eγ = 1 second, ∀γ ∈ ZΦ∗ ;
In Section VII we proved Theorem VII.1, which states
that the full program NetworkScheduler has opera• NγSI = 20, ∀γ ∈ ZΦ∗ .
tional complexity that is polynomial in the number of
PGTs in the task intake buffer (k = |Γ|) and the number To study this scenario, the scheduling interval was set to
of active PGTs (N = |ZΦ |), but exponential in the total eight thousand seconds (T SI = 8000) and we repeated
number of internal resources in the network (R = |R|). We schedule computation for scenarios with |ZΦ∗ | ranging from
validate our complexity analysis with numerical results, five to four hundred, in steps of five.
In Figure 12 the schedule computation time, decomdemonstrating how operational complexity translates to
execution time for various combinations of k, N , and R. posed into the minimal allocation phase (left), the bonus
First, we assess the computation time of AdmitTasks us- allocation phase (middle) and the overall computation
ing randomly generated sets of active PGTs (ZΦ and PGTs time (right), is plotted against N . Data points are the
in the task intake buffer (Γ). The methods for generat- average over fifty independent repetitions and error bars
ing these random sets are included in our simulator [6]. indicate one standard deviation. The time to complete
Second, we evaluate ComputeSchedule with a carefully the minimal allocation phase (left) is increasing in N and
designed set of PGTs to schedule (ZΦ∗ ) for which specific al- a polynomial fit validates that it has O(N 2 ) complexity
gorithm characteristics produce clear features in the com- (left). The time to complete the bonus allocation phase
putation time. This second evaluation complements our (middle) exhibits non-trivial variation with N , yet all feaearlier simulations on random network topologies, where tures are explained by our algorithmic analysis.
Whenever there is a gap in the schedule, the Bonusschedule computation times were consistently aligned with
RoundRobin algorithm checks the next PGT in round
the complexity analysis.
robin order to determine if all the required resources are
available (O(R) operation). Checking γ0 additionally reVIII.iii.a. Admit Tasks
quires both checking for both past and future minsep viminsep
̸= 0. For small N , numerous gaps
The operational complexity of AdmitTasks is given by olations, since tγ0
exist
and
the
round
robin
index frequently revisits γ0 , re(19). Figure 11 plots the computation time against k for
sulting
in
the
initial
spike
in
computation time. The most
constant N (left) and against N , for constant k (right).
time-intensive
operation
occurs
when filling gaps between
Each data point is the average over one hundred randomly
two
already
scheduled
PGAs,
which
requires list insertion
generated ZΦ and Γ pairs, with error bars indicating one
3
(O(N
)
in
our
implementation).
When
no gaps exist but
standard deviation. Polynomial fits of O(k ) (left) and
2
time
remains
in
the
scheduling
interval,
PGAs can simply
O(N ) (right) confirm scaling consistent with (19), validating Theorem D.10. Importantly, these results demon- be appended to the schedule (O(1)). For N < 200, gaps
strate that AdmitTasks is fast enough to process a large exists in the schedule output by the minimal allocation
number of incoming PGTs (k) within a single scheduling phase, and these are filled by list insertion. For N ≥ 200,
interval, even when there are many active PGTs (N ). For no gaps remain and new PGAs are only appended to the
example, one thousand incoming PGTs (k = 1000) are schedule by RoundRobinBonus. This transition proprocessed in less than seven seconds when there are al- duces the local maximum at N = 200. As N increases
further, the number of PGAs that can be appended to
ready one thousand active PGTs (N = 1000).
the schedule decreases, until N = 400 where the schedule output by the minimal allocation phase has no gaps
VIII.iii.b. Compute Schedule
and occupies the entire scheduling interval. A polynomial
The operational complexity of ComputeSchedule is fit validates O(N 3 ) complexity for the bonus allocation
given by (22). The minimal allocation phase, implemented phase. The overall complexity (right) confirms the result
23

(a) Number of Registered PGTs

(b) Number of Active PGTs

Figure 10: Profiling of PGTs registered by Demand Registration and active PGTs accepted by Admit Tasks based on
their filling classes [backbone (ΦB ), junction (ΦJj ∀j ∈ J), and interface (ΦIi ∀i ∈ I) filling classes]. There is one data
point for each scheduling interval, for each network topology parameterization in Table 1. Data is averaged over the
ten random topologies generated from each parameterization, and ten randomly seeded simulations for each topology.

6

N=50
N=250
N=500

7

N=750
N=1000

Average Computation Time (s)

Average Computation Time (s)

7

5
4
3
2
1
0

6

k=50
k=250
k=500

k=750
k=1000

5
4
3
2
1
0

200
400
600
800
1000
k: Number of Incoming PGTs (a.u.)

200
400
600
800
1000
N : Number of Active PGTs (a.u.)

Figure 11: Average computation time of Admit Tasks for N = |ZΦ | active PGTs and k = |Γ| incoming PGTs requiring
an accept/reject decision from Admit Tasks. Each data point is the average of 100 randomly generated ZΦ , Γ pairs and
error bars show one standard deviation. Data points are fitted with polynomials of O(k 3 ) (left) and O(N 2 ) (right).

24

Schedule Computation Time (s)

O(N 2 )
Minimal

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
0

200

400

O(N 3 )
Bonus

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

0
200
400
N : Number of Active PGTs (a.u.)

O(N 3 )
Overall

0

200

400

Figure 12: Average computation time of the minimal (left) and bonus (middle) allocation phases of Compute Schedule,
and overall computation time (right), plotted against the number of active PGTs N = |ZΦ∗ |. Each data point is the
average of 50 repetitions of Compute Schedule for a set of active PGTs ZΦ∗ . Error bars show one standard deviation.
Polynomial fits to the data are based on least squares fitting.
of Theorem D.15, showing that the schedule computation contrast, many quantum network architectures implement
time is dominated by the bonus allocation phase and has scheduling algorithms which rely on optimization, which
O(N 3 ) complexity. See Appendix D for full details of our is generally slower than direct calculation of a schedule.
Arqon’s admission control process, which ensures arrivcomplexity analysis.
ing demands do not disrupt service to accepted demands,
comes at the cost of rejecting some demands. In simulaIX. Conclusion and Outlook
tions based on our proof of principle implementation we
observed that there is scope to increase the proportion
We have designed Arqon, a novel suite of control appli- of demands that Arqon accepts. We proposed modifying
cations for a centrally controlled quantum network that the calculation which Arqon’s admission control process
establishes and satisfies well-defined service agreements uses to estimate load on the network. To further increase
with end nodes. These service agreements address real- the resource utilization and proportion of demands that
istic application execution requirements on programmable may be accepted, we proposed defining a path partition
end nodes, so that satisfying a service agreement implies that differentiates between paths through the network that
that user applications can succeed. In contrast to existing cross one or multiple long-distance backbones.
quantum network control architectures, Arqon includes an
The performance of any quantum network architecture
admission control mechanism which prioritizes service to needs to be tested in a real world deployment. We have
already accepted demands over incoming demands, pre- developed an implementation of Arqon in Python as a
venting service disruptions.
simulator. The next step is to create a real-time impleWe extended the concept of reliable service from classi- mentation of Arqon, integrate it with an SDN-controller,
cal computer networks and demonstrated through analysis and use the integrated system to produce network schedand numeric evaluations with a proof of principle imple- ules for the components of a test-bed quantum network.
mentation that Arqon provides reliable service to all ac- Such a demonstration would bring scalable quantum netcepted demands in static network topologies. We designed working one step closer to reality.
Arqon to respond to changes in network topology or capabilities. In our proof of principle implementation we did
X. Acknowledgements
not implement the mechanisms for handling these updates.
A future research direction is to create concrete implemenSG, TRB and SW acknowledge funding from the Quantum
tations of these mechanisms and evaluate the robustness
Internet Alliance (QIA). QIA has received funding from
of Arqon against changes to topology and capabilities in
the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innoa variety of parameter regimes.
vation programme under grant agreement No. 101102140.
We developed fast algorithms for producing network
SW also acknowledges funding from NWO VICI.
schedules and executing a demand admission control process, and demonstrated numerically that each algorithm
References
can process up to one thousand demands in less than 7
seconds. The core of these algorithms relies on directly
[1] S. Abruzzo, S. Bratzik, N. K. Bernardes, H. Kampercalculating how a minimal allocation of PGAs for all acmann, P. van Loock, and D. Bruß. “Quantum repeaters
tive PGTs can be scheduled in each scheduling interval. In
25

and quantum key distribution: Analysis of secret-key
rates”. In: Physical Review A 87.5 (May 2013). issn:
1094-1622. doi: 10.1103/physreva.87.052315.
[2]

S. E. Alm. “On the distributions of the scan statistics
of a Poisson process”. In: Probability and Mathematical Statistics, Essays in honour of Carl-Gustav Esseen
(1983). Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 1–9.

[3]

P. Arright and L. Salvail. “Blind Quantum Computation”. In: International Journal of Quantum Information 04.05 (2006), pp. 883–898.

[4]

L. Bacciottini, M. G. D. Andrade, S. Pouryousef,
E. A. V. Milligen, A. Chandra, N. K. Panigrahy, N. S. V.
Rao, G. Vardoyan, and D. Towsley. “Leveraging Internet Principles to Build a Quantum Network”. In: IEEE
Network (2025), pp. 1–1. doi: 10 . 1109 / MNET . 2025 .
3569494.

[5]

P. Baran. “On Distributed Communications Networks”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Communications Systems
12.1 (1964), pp. 1–9. doi: 10.1109/TCOM.1964.1088883.

[6]

T. Beauchamp, S. Gauthier, and S. Wehner. Code and
Data for for Arqon: A Suite of Control Applications Enabling Reliable Quantum Networks. 2026. doi: 10.4121/
97e0f340-6cc2-4908-9670-8308fed3e2ec.

[7]

T. R. Beauchamp, H. Jirovská, S. Gauthier, and S.
Wehner. “A Modular Quantum Network Architecture
for Integrating Network Scheduling with Local Program
Execution”. In: IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering (2025), pp. 1–31. doi: 10 . 1109 / TQE . 2025 .
3624658.

[8]

C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard. “Quantum cryptography: Public key distribution and coin tossing”. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Computers,
Systems & Signal Processing, Bangalore, India. Vol. 1.
Bangalore, India: IEEE, 1984, pp. 175–179. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2014.05.025.

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Crépeau, R. Jozsa, A.
Peres, and W. K. Wootters. “Teleporting an unknown
quantum state via dual classical and Einstein-PodolskyRosen channels”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (13 Mar. 1993),
pp. 1895–1899. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.70.1895.
C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, S. Popescu, B. Schumacher, J. A. Smolin, and W. K. Wootters. “Purification of Noisy Entanglement and Faithful Teleportation via Noisy Channels”. In: Physical Review Letters
76.5 (Jan. 1996), pp. 722–725. issn: 1079-7114. doi:
10.1103/physrevlett.76.722.
H. Bernien, B. Hensen, W. Pfaff, G. Koolstra, M. S.
Blok, L. Robledo, T. H. Taminiau, M. Markham, D. J.
Twitchen, L. Childress, and R. Hanson. “Heralded entanglement between solid-state qubits separated by
three metres”. In: Nature 497.7447 (Apr. 2013), pp. 86–
90.
R. C. Berrevoets, T. Middelburg, R. F. L. Vermeulen,
L. D. Chiesa, F. Broggi, S. Piciaccia, R. Pluis, P. Umesh,
J. F. Marques, W. Tittel, and J. A. Slater. “Deployed
measurement-device independent quantum key distribution and Bell-state measurements coexisting with
standard internet data and networking equipment”. In:
Communications Physics 5.1 (2022), p. 186. doi: 10.
1038/s42005-022-00964-6.

26

[13]

H. K. Beukers, M. Pasini, H. Choi, D. Englund, R. Hanson, and J. Borregaard. “Remote-Entanglement Protocols for Stationary Qubits with Photonic Interfaces”. In:
PRX Quantum 5.1 (Mar. 2024). issn: 2691-3399. doi:
10.1103/prxquantum.5.010202.

[14]

R. Bhardwaj and B. Jabbari. “ISDN frame relay and
its congestion control”. In: International Journal of
Satellite Communications 9.5 (1991), pp. 363–380. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/sat.4600090513. eprint:
https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 .
1002/sat.4600090513.

[15]

B. B. Blinov, D. L. Moehring, L.-M. Duan, and C.
Monroe. “Observation of entanglement between a single
trapped atom and a single photon”. In: Nature 428.6979
(Mar. 2004), pp. 153–157. doi: 10.1038/nature02377.

[16]

S. L. Braunstein and A. Mann. “Measurement of the
Bell operator and quantum teleportation”. In: Physical
Review A 51.3 (1995), R1727. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRevA.51.R1727.

[17]

H.-J. Briegel, W. Dür, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller. “Quantum Repeaters: The Role of Imperfect Local Operations
in Quantum Communication”. In: Physical Review Letters 81.26 (Dec. 1998), pp. 5932–5935. doi: 10.1103/
physrevlett.81.5932.

[18]

A. Broadbent, J. Fitzsimons, and E. Kashefi. “Universal
Blind Quantum Computation”. In: 2009 50th Annual
IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science.
Atlanta, Georgia, USA: IEEE, Oct. 2009, pp. 517–526.
doi: 10.1109/focs.2009.36.

[19]

C. Brukner, N. Paunkovic, T. Rudolph, and V. Vedral. Entanglement-assisted Orientation in Space. 2005.
arXiv: quant-ph/0509123.

[20]

G. C. Buttazzo. Hard Real-Time Computing Systems:
Predictable Scheduling Algorithms and Applications.
third. New York, NY, USA: Springer Science + Business Media, 2011. isbn: 978-1-4614-0675-4.

[21]

C. Cabrillo, J. I. Cirac, P. García-Fernández, and P.
Zoller. “Creation of entangled states of distant atoms
by interference”. In: Phys. Rev. A 59 (2 Feb. 1999),
pp. 1025–1033.

[22]

L. Childress and R. Hanson. “Diamond NV centers for
quantum computing and quantum networks”. In: MRS
Bulletin 38.2 (2013), pp. 134–138. doi: 10.1557/mrs.
2013.20.

[23]

A. M. Childs. “Secure assisted quantum computation”.
In: Quantum Information and Computation 5.6 (Sept.
2005). issn: 1533-7146. doi: 10.26421/qic5.6.

[24]

C. W. Chou, J. Laurat, H. Deng, K. S. Choi, H.
de Riedmatten, D. Felinto, and H. J. Kimble. “Functional Quantum Nodes for Entanglement Distribution
over Scalable Quantum Networks”. In: Science 316.5829
(June 2007), pp. 1316–1320. doi: 10 . 1126 / science .
1140300.

[25]

C. W. Chou, H. de Riedmatten, D. Felinto, S. V.
Polyakov, S. J. van Enk, and H. J. Kimble.
“Measurement-induced entanglement for excitation
stored in remote atomic ensembles”. In: Nature 438.7069
(Dec. 2005), pp. 828–832.

[26]

C. Cicconetti, M. Conti, and A. Passarella. “Request
Scheduling in Quantum Networks”. en. In: IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering 2 (2021), pp. 2–17.
issn: 2689-1808. doi: 10.1109/TQE.2021.3090532.

[38]

L.-M. Duan, M. D. Lukin, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller.
“Long-distance quantum communication with atomic
ensembles and linear optics”. In: Nature 414.6862 (Nov.
2001), pp. 413–418.

[27]

J. I. Cirac and P. Zoller. “Quantum Computations with
Cold Trapped Ions”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 (20 May
1995), pp. 4091–4094. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.74.
4091.

[39]

[28]

T. Coopmans, S. Brand, and D. Elkouss. “Improved analytical bounds on delivery times of long-distance entanglement”. In: Physical Review A 105.1 (Jan. 2022).
issn: 2469-9934. doi: 10.1103/physreva.105.012608.

W. Dür, H.-J. Briegel, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller. “Quantum repeaters based on entanglement purification”. In:
Physical Review A 59.1 (Jan. 1999). Publisher: American Physical Society, pp. 169–181. doi: 10 . 1103 /
PhysRevA.59.169.

[40]

M. V. G. Dutt, L. Childress, L. Jiang, E. Togan, J.
Maze, F. Jelezko, A. S. Zibrov, P. R. Hemmer, and
M. D. Lukin. “Quantum Register Based on Individual
Electronic and Nuclear Spin Qubits in Diamond”. In:
Science 316.5829 (2007), pp. 1312–1316. doi: 10.1126/
science.1139831.

[41]

A. K. Ekert. “Quantum cryptography based on Bell’s
theorem”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (6 Aug. 1991), pp. 661–
663. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.67.661.

[42]

S. Gauthier, G. Vardoyan, and S. Wehner. “An Architecture for Control of Entanglement Generation
Switches in Quantum Networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering 4 (2023), pp. 1–17. doi:
10.1109/TQE.2023.3320047.

[43]

S. Gauthier, T. Vasantam, and G. Vardoyan. “OnDemand Resource Allocation for a Quantum Network
Hub”. In: IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering
7 (2026), pp. 1–30. doi: 10.1109/TQE.2025.3641834.

[44]

J. Glaz and N. Balakrishnan, eds. Scan Statistics and
Applications. Boston, MA: Birkhäuser Boston, 1999.
isbn: 978-0-8176-4041-5. doi: 10.1007/978- 1- 46121578-3.

[45]

J. Glaz, J. I. Naus, and S. Wallenstein. Scan statistics.
Springer series in statistics. New York: Springer, 2001.
isbn: 978-0-387-98819-1.

[46]

K. Goodenough, T. Coopmans, and D. Towsley. “On
noise in swap ASAP repeater chains: exact analytics,
distributions and tight approximations”. In: Quantum 9
(May 2025), p. 1744. issn: 2521-327X. doi: 10.22331/
q-2025-05-15-1744.

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

J. P. Covey, H. Weinfurter, and H. Bernien. “Quantum
networks with neutral atom processing nodes”. en. In:
npj Quantum Information 9.1 (Sept. 2023). Number:
1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 1–12. issn:
2056-6387. doi: 10.1038/s41534-023-00759-9.
A. Dahlberg, M. Skrzypczyk, T. Coopmans, L. Wubben,
F. Rozpędek, M. Pompili, A. Stolk, P. Pawełczak, R.
Knegjens, J. d. O. Filho, R. Hanson, and S. Wehner.
“A Link Layer Protocol for Quantum Networks”. In:
Proceedings of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data
Communication. Aug. 2019, pp. 159–173. doi: 10.1145/
3341302.3342070.
S. Daiss, S. Langenfeld, S. Welte, E. Distante, P.
Thomas, L. Hartung, O. Morin, and G. Rempe. “A
quantum-logic gate between distant quantum-network
modules”. In: Science 371.6529 (2021), pp. 614–617.
doi: 10.1126/science.abe3150. eprint: https://www.
science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.abe3150.
B. Davies, T. Beauchamp, G. Vardoyan, and S. Wehner.
“Tools for the Analysis of Quantum Protocols Requiring
State Generation Within a Time Window”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Quantum Engineering 5 (2024), pp. 1–
20. doi: 10.1109/TQE.2024.3358674.

[33]

C. G. Davis. “An experimental pulse code modulation
system for short-haul trunks”. In: The Bell System Technical Journal 41.1 (1962), pp. 1–24. doi: 10.1002/j.
1538-7305.1962.tb03261.x.

[34]

C. Delle Donne et al. “An operating system for executing applications on quantum network nodes”. In: Nature 639.8054 (Mar. 2025), pp. 321–328. doi: 10.1038/
s41586-025-08704-w.

[47]

D. Gottesman, T. Jennewein, and S. Croke. “LongerBaseline Telescopes Using Quantum Repeaters”. In:
Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (7 2012), p. 070503. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.109.070503.

[35]

D. Deutsch, A. Ekert, R. Jozsa, C. Macchiavello, S.
Popescu, and A. Sanpera. “Quantum Privacy Amplification and the Security of Quantum Cryptography
over Noisy Channels”. In: Physical Review Letters 77.13
(Sept. 1996), pp. 2818–2821. issn: 1079-7114. doi: 10.
1103/physrevlett.77.2818.

[48]

A. Gruber, A. Dräbenstedt, C. Tietz, L. Fleury, J.
Wrachtrup, and C. von Borczyskowski. “Scanning Confocal Optical Microscopy and Magnetic Resonance on
Single Defect Centers”. In: Science 276.5321 (1997),
pp. 2012–2014. doi: 10.1126/science.276.5321.2012.

[36]

D. Ding and L. Jiang. Coordinating Decisions via Quantum Telepathy. arXiv:2407.21723. Sept. 2024. doi: 10.
48550/arXiv.2407.21723.

[49]

[37]

P. Drmota, D. Nadlinger, D. Main, B. Nichol, E. Ainley, D. Leichtle, A. Mantri, E. Kashefi, R. Srinivas,
G. Araneda, C. Ballance, and D. Lucas. “Verifiable
Blind Quantum Computing with Trapped Ions and Single Photons”. In: Physical Review Letters 132.15 (Apr.
2024). issn: 1079-7114. doi: 10 . 1103 / physrevlett .
132.150604.

H. Gu, R. Yu, Z. Li, X. Wang, and F. Zhou. “ESDI:
Entanglement Scheduling and Distribution in the Quantum Internet”. In: 2023 32nd International Conference
on Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN)
(2023), pp. 1–10. doi: 10 . 1109 / ICCCN58024 . 2023 .
10230193.

[50]

J. M. Halpern, R. HAAS, a. doria avri, L. Dong, W.
Wang, H. M. Khosravi, J. H. Salim, and R. Gopal.
Forwarding and Control Element Separation (ForCES)
Protocol Specification. Request for Comments RFC
5810. Num Pages: 124. Internet Engineering Task Force,
Mar. 2010. doi: 10.17487/RFC5810.

27

[51]

M. Hasanpour, S. Shariat, P. Barnaghi, S. A. Hoseinitabatabaei, S. Vahid, and R. Tafazolli. “Quantum load
balancing in ad hoc networks”. en. In: Quantum Information Processing 16.6 (Apr. 2017), p. 148. issn: 15731332. doi: 10.1007/s11128-017-1578-y.

[62]

D. Kreutz, F. M. V. Ramos, P. E. Veríssimo, C. E.
Rothenberg, S. Azodolmolky, and S. Uhlig. “SoftwareDefined Networking: A Comprehensive Survey”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 103.1 (Jan. 2015), pp. 14–76. issn:
1558-2256. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2014.2371999.

[52]

W. Hoeffding. “Probability Inequalities for Sums of
Bounded Random Variables”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 58.301 (1963), pp. 13–30.
doi: 10.1080/01621459.1963.10500830. eprint: https:
//www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/01621459.
1963.10500830.

[63]

V. Krutyanskiy, M. Canteri, M. Meraner, J. Bate, V.
Krcmarsky, J. Schupp, N. Sangouard, and B. P. Lanyon.
“Telecom-Wavelength Quantum Repeater Node Based
on a Trapped-Ion Processor”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 130
(21 May 2023), p. 213601. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.
130.213601.

[53]

M. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, and R. Horodecki. “General teleportation channel, singlet fraction, and quasidistillation”. In: Phys. Rev. A 60 (3 Sept. 1999),
pp. 1888–1898. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.60.1888.

[64]

[54]

P. C. Humphreys, N. Kalb, J. P. J. Morits, R. N.
Schouten, R. F. L. Vermeulen, D. J. Twitchen, M.
Markham, and R. Hanson. “Deterministic delivery of
remote entanglement on a quantum network”. In: Nature 558.7709 (June 2018). arXiv:1712.07567, pp. 268–
273. issn: 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586018-0200-5.

V. Krutyanskiy, M. Galli, V. Krcmarsky, S. Baier, D. A.
Fioretto, Y. Pu, A. Mazloom, P. Sekatski, M. Canteri,
M. Teller, J. Schupp, J. Bate, M. Meraner, N. Sangouard, B. P. Lanyon, and T. E. Northup. “Entanglement of Trapped-Ion Qubits Separated by 230 Meters”.
In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 130 (5 Feb. 2023), p. 050803. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.130.050803.

[65]

T. van Leent, M. Bock, F. Fertig, R. Garthoff, S. Eppelt,
Y. Zhou, P. Malik, M. Seubert, T. Bauer, W. Rosenfeld, W. Zhang, C. Becher, and H. Weinfurter. “Entangling single atoms over 33 km telecom fibre”. In: Nature
607.7917 (July 2022), pp. 69–73.

[66]

C. Liu, Z. Dutton, C. H. Behroozi, and L. V. Hau. “Observation of coherent optical information storage in an
atomic medium using halted light pulses”. In: Nature
409 (2001), pp. 490–493. doi: 10.1038/35054017.

[67]

W.-Z. Liu et al. “Long-lived remote ion-ion entanglement for scalable quantum repeaters”. In: Nature (Feb.
2026). doi: 10.1038/s41586-026-10177-4.

[68]

S. Maiti, G. Avis, S. Kar, and S. Wehner. Requirements for Teleportation in an Intercity Quantum Network. 2026. arXiv: 2602.04869.

[69]

P. Maunz, D. L. Moehring, S. Olmschenk, K. C. Younge,
D. N. Matsukevich, and C. Monroe. “Quantum interference of photon pairs from two remote trapped atomic
ions”. In: Nature Physics 3.8 (2007), pp. 538–541.

[70]

N. McKeown, T. Anderson, H. Balakrishnan, G.
Parulkar, L. Peterson, J. Rexford, S. Shenker, and J.
Turner. “OpenFlow: enabling innovation in campus networks”. en. In: ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 38.2 (Mar. 2008), pp. 69–74. issn: 01464833. doi: 10.1145/1355734.1355746.

[71]

M. Michler, K. Mattle, H. Weinfurter, and A. Zeilinger.
“Interferometric Bell-state analysis”. In: Physical Review A 53.3 (1996), R1209.

[72]

J. I. Naus. “Approximations for Distributions of Scan
Statistics”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 77.377 (1982). Publisher: [American Statistical Association, Taylor & Francis, Ltd.], pp. 177–183.
issn: 0162-1459. doi: 10.2307/2287786.

[73]

C. T. Nguyen, D. D. Sukachev, M. K. Bhaskar, B.
Machielse, D. S. Levonian, E. N. Knall, P. Stroganov,
R. Riedinger, H. Park, M. Lon čar, and M. D. Lukin.
“Quantum Network Nodes Based on Diamond Qubits
with an Efficient Nanophotonic Interface”. In: Phys.
Rev. Lett. 123 (18 Oct. 2019), p. 183602. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.123.183602.

[74]

L. Peterson and B. Davie. Computer Networks: A Systems Approach. Open-source edition available at https:
//book.systemsapproach.org/, licensed under CC BY
4.0. Elsevier, 2012. Chap. 2.5.

[55]

[56]

Á. G. Iñesta, G. Vardoyan, L. Scavuzzo, and S. Wehner.
“Optimal entanglement distribution policies in homogeneous repeater chains with cutoffs”. en. In: npj Quantum
Information 9.1 (May 2023). Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 1–7. issn: 2056-6387. doi:
10.1038/s41534-023-00713-9.
R. Jain. “Congestion control and traffic management
in ATM networks: Recent advances and a survey”. In:
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 28.13 (1996).
ATM/NII, pp. 1723–1738. issn: 0169-7552. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0169-7552(96)00012-8.

[57]

C. Jones, D. Kim, M. T. Rakher, P. G. Kwiat, and T. D.
Ladd. “Design and analysis of communication protocols for quantum repeater networks”. In: New Journal
of Physics 18.8 (Aug. 2016), p. 083015. doi: 10.1088/
1367-2630/18/8/083015.

[58]

C. Jones, D. Kim, M. T. Rakher, P. G. Kwiat, and T. D.
Ladd. “Design and analysis of communication protocols for quantum repeater networks”. In: New Journal
of Physics 18.8 (Aug. 2016), p. 083015. doi: 10.1088/
1367-2630/18/8/083015.

[59]

N. Joukov, A. Traeger, R. Iyer, C. P. Wright, and E.
Zadok. “Operating system profiling via latency analysis”. In: Proceedings of the 7th Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation. OSDI ’06. Seattle, Washington: USENIX Association, 2006, pp. 89–
102. isbn: 1931971471.

[60]

[61]

P. Kómár, E. M. Kessler, M. Bishof, L. Jiang, A. S.
Sørensen, J. Ye, and M. D. Lukin. “A quantum network
of clocks”. In: Nature Physics 10.8 (June 2014), pp. 582–
587. issn: 1745-2481. doi: 10.1038/nphys3000.
W. Kozlowski, F. Kuipers, and S. Wehner. “A P4 Data
Plane for the Quantum Internet”. In: Proceedings of the
3rd P4 Workshop in Europe. CoNEXT ’20: The 16th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies. Barcelona Spain: ACM, Dec.
2020, pp. 49–51. isbn: 978-1-4503-8181-9. doi: 10.1145/
3426744.3431321.

28

[75]

D. F. Phillips, A. Fleischhauer, A. Mair, R. L.
Walsworth, and M. D. Lukin. “Storage of Light in
Atomic Vapor”. In: Physical Review Letters 86.5 (2001),
pp. 783–786. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.86.783.

[76]

A. Pirker and W. Dür. “A quantum network stack and
protocols for reliable entanglement-based networks”. In:
New Journal of Physics 21.3 (Mar. 2019). Publisher:
IOP Publishing, p. 033003. issn: 1367-2630. doi: 10 .
1088/1367-2630/ab05f7.

[77]

[78]

M. Pompili, C. Delle Donne, I. te Raa, B. van der Vecht,
M. Skrzypczyk, G. Ferreira, L. de Kluijver, A. J. Stolk,
S. L. N. Hermans, P. Pawełczak, W. Kozlowski, R. Hanson, and S. Wehner. “Experimental demonstration of
entanglement delivery using a quantum network stack”.
en. In: npj Quantum Information 8.1 (Oct. 2022). Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 1–10.
issn: 2056-6387. doi: 10.1038/s41534-022-00631-2.
M. Pompili, S. L. N. Hermans, S. Baier, H. K. C.
Beukers, P. C. Humphreys, R. N. Schouten, R. F. L.
Vermeulen, M. J. Tiggelman, L. dos Santos Martins,
B. Dirkse, S. Wehner, and R. Hanson. “Realization
of a multinode quantum network of remote solid-state
qubits”. In: Science 372.6539 (Apr. 2021). Publisher:
American Association for the Advancement of Science,
pp. 259–264. doi: 10.1126/science.abg1919.

[88]

S. Tani, H. Kobayashi, and K. Matsumoto. “Exact
Quantum Algorithms for the Leader Election Problem”.
en. In: ACM Transactions on Computation Theory 4.1
(Mar. 2012), pp. 1–24. issn: 1942-3454, 1942-3462. doi:
10.1145/2141938.2141939.

[89]

J. Tucker, P. Strange, P. Mironowicz, and J. Quintanilla. “Quantum-assisted rendezvous on graphs: explicit algorithms and quantum computer simulations”.
In: New Journal of Physics 26.9 (Sept. 2024), p. 093038.
issn: 1367-2630. doi: 10.1088/1367-2630/ad78f8.

[90]

W. G. Unruh. “Maintaining coherence in quantum computers”. In: Phys. Rev. A 51 (2 Feb. 1995), pp. 992–997.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.51.992.

[91]

M. Uphoff, M. Brekenfeld, G. Rempe, and S. Ritter.
“An integrated quantum repeater at telecom wavelength
with single atoms in optical fiber cavities”. In: Applied
Physics B 122.3 (Mar. 2016). issn: 1432-0649. doi: 10.
1007/s00340-015-6299-2.

[92]

R. Van Meter, R. Satoh, N. Benchasattabuse, T. Matsuo, M. Hajdušek, T. Satoh, S. Nagayama, and S.
Suzuki. “A Quantum Internet Architecture”. In: 2022
IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE). arXiv:2112.07092. Sept.
2022, pp. 341–352. doi: 10 . 1109 / QCE53715 . 2022 .
00055.

[79]

M. Ruf, N. H. Wan, H. Choi, D. Englund, and R. Hanson. “Quantum networks based on color centers in diamond”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 130.7 (Aug.
2021), p. 070901. issn: 0021-8979. doi: 10 . 1063 / 5 .
0056534.

[93]

R. Van Meter, T. Satoh, T. D. Ladd, W. J. Munro,
and K. Nemoto. “Path Selection for Quantum Repeater
Networks”. In: Networking Science 3.1-4 (Dec. 2013).
arXiv:1206.5655, pp. 82–95. issn: 2076-0310, 2076-0329.
doi: 10.1007/s13119-013-0026-2.

[80]

N. Sangouard, R. Dubessy, and C. Simon. “Quantum
repeaters based on single trapped ions”. In: Phys. Rev.
A 79 (4 Apr. 2009), p. 042340. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.
79.042340.

[94]

[81]

N. Sangouard, C. Simon, H. de Riedmatten, and N.
Gisin. “Quantum repeaters based on atomic ensembles
and linear optics”. In: Rev. Mod. Phys. 83 (1 Mar. 2011),
pp. 33–80. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.83.33.

G. Vardoyan, S. Guha, P. Nain, and D. Towsley. “On
the Exact Analysis of an Idealized Quantum Switch”. In:
SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev. 48.3 (Mar. 2021),
pp. 79–80. issn: 0163-5999. doi: 10 . 1145 / 3453953 .
3453971.

[95]

B. van der Vecht, A. T. Yücel, H. Jirovská, and S.
Wehner. Qoala: an Application Execution Environment
for Quantum Internet Nodes. arXiv:2502.17296. Feb. 24,
2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2502.17296. arXiv: 2502.
17296.

[96]

G. Viola and P. Mironowicz. “Quantum strategies for
rendezvous and domination tasks on graphs with mobile
agents”. In: Physical Review A 109.4 (Apr. 2024). issn:
2469-9934. doi: 10.1103/physreva.109.042201.

[97]

P. Walther and A. Zeilinger. “Experimental realization
of a photonic Bell-state analyzer”. In: Physical Review
A 72.1 (2005), p. 010302. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevA.72.010302.

[98]

A. Waters and K. Ab-Hamid. “Congestion control for
frame relay networks”. In: IEE Colloquium on Frame
Relay. 1992, pp. 3/1–3/4.

[99]

S.-y. Yu, E. Perego, J. Phillips, Y.-W. Cheah, P. Umesh,
G. Gao, J. Liu, E. Kissel, M. Bregar, K. Sun, Q. Wu, R.
Valivarthi, E. Saglamyurek, W. Wu, M. Spiropulu, H.
Häffner, and I. Monga. “A Two-Level Control Framework for Quantum Networks”. In: 2025 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE). Vol. 01. 2025, pp. 1302–1311. doi: 10.
1109/QCE65121.2025.00145.

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

T. Sekimoto and J. Puente. “A Satellite Time-Division
Multiple-Access Experiment”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Communication Technology 16.4 (1968), pp. 581–
588. doi: 10.1109/TCOM.1968.1089895.
C. Simon, H. de Riedmatten, M. Afzelius, N. Sangouard, H. Zbinden, and N. Gisin. “Quantum Repeaters
with Photon Pair Sources and Multimode Memories”.
In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (19 May 2007), p. 190503. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.190503.
M. Skrzypczyk and S. Wehner. An Architecture for
Meeting Quality-of-Service Requirements in Multi-User
Quantum Networks. arXiv:2111.13124. Nov. 2021.
K. Steenhaut, K. Degieter, W. Brissinck, and E. Dirkx.
“Scheduling and admission control policies: A case
study for ATM”. In: Computer Networks and ISDN
Systems. Signaling and Management of ATM Networks
29.5 (Apr. 1, 1997), pp. 539–554. issn: 0169-7552. doi:
10.1016/S0169-7552(96)00118-3.

[86]

A. S. Tanenbaum. Modern Operating Systems. second.
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall PTR, 2001.

[87]

A. S. Tanenbaum. Computer Networks. 4th. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall PTR, 2003, p. 912.
isbn: 978-0130661029.

29

[100]

R. Zhao, Y. O. Dudin, S. D. Jenkins, C. J. Campbell,
D. N. Matsukevich, T. A. B. Kennedy, and A. Kuzmich.
“Long-lived quantum memory”. In: Nature Physics 5 (2
Feb. 2009), pp. 100–104. doi: 10.1038/nphys1152.

[101]

H. Zimmermann. “OSI Reference Model - The ISO
Model of Architecture for Open Systems Interconnection”. In: IEEE Transactions on Communications 28.4
(1980), pp. 425–432. doi: 10.1109/TCOM.1980.1094702.

[102]

W. H. Zurek. “Environment-induced superselection
rules”. In: Phys. Rev. D 26 (8 Oct. 1982), pp. 1862–
1880. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.26.1862.

Appendices
A.

Notation

The notation used throughout this paper is summarized
in Table 4.

B.

Network Scheduler Algorithms

In this appendix we provide pseudocode algorithms for all
processes of the Network Scheduler for which an algorithm
is specified in the main text. These are as follows:
– UpdateFillingClasses, Algorithm 4 for Update
Filling Classes.
– AdmitTasks, Algorithm 5 for Admit Tasks.
– DirectAllocation, Algorithm 6, which implements the inner loop of the minimal allocation phase
of Compute Schedule.
– BonusRoundRobin, Algorithm 7, which implements the inner loop of the bonus allocation phase
of Compute Schedule.
– nextStartTime, allResourcesAvailable and
getLeft[Right]MinsepViolations are all in Algorithm 8. These functions are used by the BonusRoundRobin algorithm to determine whether additional PGAs can be added to a network schedule.

30

Algorithm 4: Algorithm for Update Filling
Classes. The functions BuildFillingClasses,
AssignFillingClass, and ApplyRuleMissingPath may be re-defined by an implementation, or
they may follow the default implementation of Section VI.
Function UpdateFillingClasses:
Input : Set of filling classes Ψ = {Zψ , Πψ }ψ ,
Path partition Π, Set of terminated
PGTs τ .
Output: Updated set of filling classes
Φ = {Zϕ , Πϕ }ϕ , Mapping of
associated resources ξ.
Set Γ∗ ← ∅ ;
Set Φ, ξ ← BuildFillingClasses(Z = ∅, Π) ;
for ψ ∈ Ψ do
for γ ∈ Zψ do
≤ CurrentTime
if γ ∈ τ or texpiry
γ
then
continue;
end
if ∃ϕ s.t. πγ ∈ Πϕ then
Set
Φ ← AssignFillingClass(γ, Φ);
else
Set Γ∗ ← Γ∗ ∪ γ ;
end
end
end
for γ ∈ Γ∗ do
Set Φ ← ApplyRuleMissingPath(γ, Φ) ;
end
end
return Φ, ξ;

Symbol
S
N
N inst
texpiry
p = (w, s, F )
tminsep
d = (draw , Md )
ϵservice
d
γ
Eγ
ppacket
γ
tstart
γ
δ(γ, t; r)
G = (V, E)
E⊂V
I⊂V
J ⊂V
B⊂V
R=I ⊔J ⊔B
R = |R|
L
∗
E ⊂E
π = (π0 , · · · , πk )
Pvalid
Pallowed ⊂ Pvalid
Π = {Πϕ }
τ
Γ
Γd ⊆ Γ
k = |Γ|
S
T SI
tcompute
Φ
ϕ = (Zϕ , Πϕ )
ZΦ
N = |ZΦ |
ξ

Definition
Applications
An application session
A set of end nodes which hosts an application session
A number of application instances required to complete an application session
The expiry time of an application session and demand
Demands
A packet of s end-to-end links to be generated within time window w, with minimum fidelity F
A minimum required time separation between attempts to generate a packet
The full demand consists of the raw demand draw and demand metadata Md
The service error parameter for a demand d
Packet Generation Tasks
A PGT
The duration of PGAs for the PGT γ
The probability a PGA of duration Eγ successfully produces the required packet of links
The earliest time that a PGA for a PGT γ could be scheduled if it is accepted
A PGA for a PGT γ scheduled at time t on resource r
Network Topology and Components
A network resource graph with vertices V and edges E
The set of end nodes
The set of entanglement generation interfaces
The set of junction nodes
The set of long-distance backbones
Set of all internal resources in a network
Number of internal resources in a network
The set of local areas of G
A set of allowed edges of a network resource graph G
Paths
a path through the network resource graph from source node π0 to destination node πk
The set of valid entanglement generation paths
A set of allowed paths, further restricted from the set of valid paths
A disjoint partition of Pvalid or Pallowed
Demand Manager
The demand termination buffer
The PGT intake buffer
A set of PGTs in the task intake buffer which can realize a demand d
Number of PGTs in the task intake buffer
Network Scheduler
A network schedule
The duration of a scheduling interval
The computation time of the Network Schedule application
The set of filing classes
A filling class based on the cell of the path partition Πϕ so that πγ ∈ Πϕ ∀γ ∈ Zϕ
The set of all active PGTs
Number of active PGTs
Mapping from a set of paths to the associated internal resources

Table 4: Summary of the notation used throughout this paper. The notation f [i] indicates the ith entry of a vector,
tuple, matrix or dictionary-like object f .

31

Algorithm 5: The Admit Tasks process of the Network Scheduler is implemented by the function AdmitTasks. The helper function GetFillingClass returns the filling class of a task if it exists, or else it raises a
FillingClassError. The function CalculateRequiredTime is defined in Algorithm 2.
Function AdmitTasks:
Input : Task Intake Object Γ, Set of filling classes Φ = {Zϕ , Πϕ }ϕ , Set of live network resources R.
Output: Set of Filling classes Φ, List of accepted PGTs A.
Set Tξr ← T SI for r ∈ R ;
for ϕ ∈ Φ do
R(Zϕ ) = CalculateRequiredTime(Zϕ ) ;
for r ∈ ξ(Πϕ ) do
Set Tξr ← Tξr − R(Zϕ ) ;
end
end
while Γ ̸= 0
 do
Set Γd ← Γ[0] ;
while Γd ̸= 0
 do
Set γ ← Γd [0] ;
try:
Set ϕ ← GetFillingClass(γ) ;
except FillingClassError:
Set Γd ← Γd \ γ ;
continue;
end
Set Z̃ϕ ← Zϕ + γ;
Set Accept ← True ;
Set Tξr ← Tξr + R(Zϕ ) for r ∈ ξ(Πϕ ) ;
Set R(Z˜ϕ ) ← CalculateRequiredTime(Z˜ϕ ) ;
for r ∈ ξ(Πϕ ) do
if Tξr − R(Z˜ϕ ) < 0 then
Set Accept ← False ;
Set Γd ← Γd \ γ ;
if Γd = 0
 then
Set Γ ← Γ \ Γd ;
end
break;
end
end
if Accept then
Set A ← A + γ ;
Set Zϕ ← Z˜ϕ ;
Set R(Zϕ ) ← R(Z˜ϕ ) ;
Set Tξr ← Tξr − R(Zϕ ) for r ∈ ξ(Πϕ ) ;
Set Γ ← Γ \ Γd ;
break;
end
end
end
return Φ, A
end

32

Algorithm 7: Algorithm for the inner loop of
the bonus allocation phase of Compute Schedule. Z|ϕ|,k = {k, k + 1, ..., |ϕ| − 1, 0, 1, ..., k − 1)}.
δ(γ, t; r) is a PGA for a PGT γ scheduled
at time t on resource r.
The subroutines
nextStartTime, allResourcesAvailable and
getLeft[Right]MinsepViolations are specified
in Algorithm 8.

Algorithm 6: Scheduler for direct allocation of
PGA start times for all PGTs in a single filling class
ϕ. NxSI is the number of PGAs, each with duration
Ex , of PGT γx that need to be scheduled.
Function DirectAllocation:

Input : Filling class ϕ = Zϕ , Πϕ with
Zϕ = (γ0 , ..., γM −1 ), network schedule
S, start time t0 .
Output: Updated network schedule S.
Order PGTs γ ∈ Zϕ by a set of indices
SI
X = {1, · · · , |Zϕ |} such that NxSI ≤ Nx+1
Set M ← |Zϕ |
Set cx←

 PM
max
max
Ey + tminsep
,
E
y
y=x y ;

Function RoundRobinBonus:
Input : Filling class ϕ, network schedule S.
Output: Updated network schedule S.
Set T rel ← {};
Set test ← nextStartTime(S, T rel , 0);
Set k ← 0;
while test < T SI do
for i ∈ Z|ϕ|,k do
Set Cresource ←
allResourcesAvailable(γi , test ; S)
Set VLM S ←
getLeftMinsepViolations(γi , test ; S)
Set VRM S ←
getRightMinsepViolations(γi , test ; S)
Set Cminsep ← VLM S ∪ VRM S = ∅;
if Cresource ∧ Cminsep ∧ test + Eγi < T SI
then
for r ∈ πγi do
Add PGA δ(γi , test ; r) to Sr ;
end
Set k ← i;
else if VLM S ̸= ∅ then
minsep
Append maxδ∈VLM S (tend
) to
δ ∗ + t γi
rel
T
end
end
Set test ← nextStartTime(S, T rel , test );
end
end

y∈{x,···M }

SI
Set nx ← NxSI − Nx−1
for x ≥ 1;
SI
Set n0 ← N0 − 1;
Set tstart ← t0 ;
for m = 0, ..., M − 1 do
for k = 0, ..., nm − 1 do
for x = m, ..., MP
− 1 do
x
Set toffset ← y=m Ey ;
for r ∈ πγx do
Add PGA
δ(γx , tstart + kcm + toffset ; r) to
S[r];
end
end
end
for r ∈ πγx do
Add PGA δ(γm , tstart + nm cm ; r) to S[r];
end
Set tstart ← tstart + nm cm + Em ;
end
end

33

Algorithm 8: Auxiliary algorithms used in BonusRoundRobin, Algorithm 7.
Function nextStartTime:
Input : Network Schedule S, list of release times T̂ rel , current time t
Output:S
next possible start time test , updated set of release times T rel
′
Set S = r∈R {δ ∈ Sr : tend
> t};
δ
′
rel
if S = ∅ ∧ T̂ = ∅ then
return ∞
end
Set ts = min{tend
: δ ∈ S ′ };
δ
Set tr = min T̂ rel ;
if tr ≤ ts then
Set T rel ← T̂ rel \ tr ;
end
return min{ts , tr }, T rel ;
end
Function allResourcesAvailable:
Input : PGT γ, time t, network schedule S
Output: boolean
for r ∈ πγ ∩ R do
if r is not available in [t, t + Eγ ) then
return False
end
;
end
return True;
end
Function getLeftMinsepViolations:
Input : PGT γ, time t, network schedule S
Output: set of conflicting PGAs, VLM S
Set VLM S ← ∅;
for r ∈ πγ ∩ R do
minsep
Set S ′ ← {δ ∈ Sr : [tstart
, tend
, t] ̸= ∅};
δ
δ ) ∩ (t − tγ
MS
MS
′
Set VL ← VL ∪ {δ ∈ S : demandID(δ) = demandID(γ)};
end
return VLM S ;
end
Function getRightMinsepViolations:
Input : PGT γ, time t, network schedule S
Output: set of conflicting PGAs, VRM S
Set VLM S ← ∅;
for r ∈ πγ ∩ R do
minsep
Set S ′ ← {δ ∈ Sr : [tstart
, tend
) ̸= ∅};
δ
δ ) ∩ (t, t + tγ
Set VRM S ← VRM S ∪ {δ ∈ S ′ : demandID(δ) = demandID(γ)};
end
return VRM S ;
end

34

As the ordering ≥ξ is only a partial order, there may
exist non-comparable elements of Φ using ≥ξ . In particThe main goal of this Appendix is to prove Theorem V.2, ular, if ξ(Πψ ) ∩ ξ(Πϕ ) = ∅ then ψ and ϕ do not have a
which is a statement about the performance of the Net- determinate order under ≥ξ .
work Scheduler control application. To prove this theoRecall that the network resource graph G, from which
rem, we first develop a series of intermediate results which the set of valid paths Pvalid and the path partition Π of
support the final analysis. This section is organized as Pvalid are derived, may have the property of being interfollows:
nally connected. In that case we write that the path partition Π describes an internally connected network.
1. We define a method of comparing filling classes and
a well-behaved property for an abstract set of filling Definition 15 (Well-behaved set of filling classes). Let
classes. Subsequent results for the performance of the Φ = {ϕ0 , ϕ1 , ..., ϕn−1 } be a set of filling classes defined by
Admit Tasks and Compute Schedule processes require the path partition Π. Let ξ be the mapping of between a
an abstract set of filling classes to have this property. set of paths and their associated resources. We say that Φ
is well-behaved if the following conditions are met:
2. We define sequentially valid schedules, define condi1. ∀i ̸= j, ξ(Πϕi ) ̸= ξ(Πϕj )
tions under which a schedule for a single filling class
2. ∀i ̸= j, ξ(Πϕi ) ∩ ξ(Πϕj ) ̸= ∅ =⇒ ξ(Πϕi ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕj ) ∨
may be guaranteed to be sequentially valid, and we
ξ(Πϕj ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕi ).
calculate the required duration of sequentially valid
With the ordering ≤ξ , condition 2. may be re-stated as:
schedules for a single filling class.

C.

Performance Analysis

2’. ∀i ̸= j, ξ(Πϕi ) ∩ ξ(Πϕj ) ̸= ∅ =⇒ ϕj >ξ ϕi ∨ ϕi >ξ
ϕj .

3. We define valid schedules and prove that the compute
schedule process produces valid schedules.

These conditions ensure that firstly no two filling classes
4. We prove that the admission control process is sound, can be associated with exactly the same set of resources
meaning that newly accepted demands do not disrupt and secondly that if there is any overlap of associated resources between filling classes then the filling classes are
existing service agreements (C3).
comparable.
5. We prove Theorem V.2.
Lemma
C.2. Let the path partition Π describe an internally connected network.
Let
C.i. Filling Classes
Φ = {ϕn−1 , ϕn−2 , · · · , ϕ1 , ϕ0 } be a well-behaved set
of filling classes defined by Π. Then under ≤ξ as in
In this section we first prove that each PGT is only in a
Definition 14, there is a unique greatest element of Φ.
single filling class, as long as the path partition Π which
defines Φ is disjoint. This result is used later in the proof Proof. The existence of a path partition Π with at least
of C.4. We then build up towards defining a well-behaved one cell in the partition defines a set of filling classes with
property for an abstract set of filling classes, required by at least one filling class. In the case that the partition has
Theorem V.2. As a pre-curser, we define a method of com- only a single cell Π0 , then there is a single filling class ϕ0 ,
paring filling classes, ≤ξ . Finally in this section we prove and ϕ0 is a unique greatest element of Φ.
Suppose therefore that the path partition has n > 1
that a well-behaved set of filling classes in an internally
cells,
and therefore defines a set of n > 1 filling classes
connected network has a unique greatest element under
Φ.
For
the sake of contradiction, suppose Φ has no unique
the ordering ≤ξ . This result is used later in the proof of
greatest
element.
Theorem C.7.
Then there exists i, j such that there is no k satisfying
Lemma C.1. Let Π = {Πϕ } be a disjoint path partition ϕk >ξ ϕi and ϕk >ξ ϕj . Such ϕi , ϕj are greatest elements
and Φ the set of filling classes defined by Π. Let Z be a set of Φ. As ϕ is well-behaved, we must have that ϕi and ϕj
of PGTs such that ∀γ ∈ Z, ∃ϕ ∈ Φ s.t. πγ ∈ Πϕ . Then, are incomparable under ≥ξ and so ξ(Πϕi ) ∩ ξ(Πϕj ) = ∅.
{Zϕ } is a disjoint partition of Z.
As Π describes an internally connected network, there
exists some path π ∗ which passes through nodes in ξ(Πϕi )
Proof. (Disjointedness) Suppose ∃γ ∈ Z such that γ ∈ Zϕ and nodes in ξ(Πϕj ). As Π is a disjoint partition, there
and γ ∈ Zψ . This implies that πγ ∈ Πϕ and πγ ∈ Πψ , exists a unique k ∗ such that π ∗ ∈ Πϕ ∗ . As π ∗ passes
k
which implies Πϕ ∩ Πψ ̸= ∅. This contradicts that Π is a through nodes in ξ(Πϕi ), we must have that ξ(Πϕ ∗ ) ∩
k
disjoint partition and so no such γ may exist.
ξ(Πϕi ) ̸= ∅. As Φ is well-behaved, this implies that either
ξ(Πϕi ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕk∗ ) or ξ(Πϕk∗ ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕi ). If the former case
(Completeness) By the hypothesis, ∀γ ∈ Z, ∃ϕ ∈ Φ such holds, then ϕk∗ >ξ ϕi , contradicting that ϕi is a greatest
that πγ ∈ Πϕ . Hence every γ ∈ Z is a member of some element of Φ. If the latter case holds, then ξ({π ∗ }) ⊆
Zϕ .
ξ(Πϕk∗ ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕi ). However, as ξ({π ∗ }) ∩ ξ(Πϕj ) ̸= ∅,
then ξ(Πϕi ) ∩ ξ(Πϕj ) ̸= ∅ contradicting that ϕi and ϕj are
Definition 14 (Comparison of filling classes). We define incomparable under ≥ξ .
a partial order on Φ by ϕ >ξ ψ ⇔ ξ(Πψ ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕ ), with
The same logic applies symmetrically to ϕj , and thereequality iff ξ(Πψ ) = ξ(Πϕ ).
fore no such i, j can exist and the result holds.
35

Proof. By the hypothesis, the schedule S contains exactly
N PGAs of each γ ∈ Zϕ . Suppose j ≤ N − 2. Beginning
In the following, we first introduce a property called a minfrom s0,j , the start time of the j th PGA of PGT γ0 , resep violation. We then make use of this property to define
peated application of conditions c1 and c2 generate the
a sequentially valid schedule for a single filling class. We
sequence of start and end times of the j th PGAs of each
then prove that a scheduling method that adheres to three
PGT γx ,
simple conditions produces sequentially valid schedules for
x−1
a single filling class.
X
sx,j = s0,j +
Eγy , ∀x ≥ 1,
(27)
Definition 16 (Minsep violation). Let S be a schedule for
y=0
filling class ϕ with Zϕ = {γ0 , · · · , γM −1 } with start times
x
X
sx,i and end times ex,i for the ith scheduled PGA of PGT
ex,j = s0,j +
Eγy , ∀x ≥ 0.
(28)
γx , where x ∈ {0, · · · , M − 1}. We say a minsep violay=0
tion occurs in S if ∃x, i such that sx,i+1 − ex,i < tminsep
.
γx
(⇒) Suppose the schedule S has properties c1 and c2 of
Definition 17 (Sequentially valid). A schedule is said to a sequentially valid schedule. By (24), the start time for
be sequentially valid if it has the following two proper- the (j +1)th PGA of PGT γ0 must satisfy s0,j+1 ≥ eM −1,j .
ties:
By (28), that is
1. No two PGAs are scheduled simultaneously, and
M
−1
X
s0,j+1 ≥ s0,j +
Eγy .
(29)
2. No minsep violations occur.
C.ii.

Schedules for a Single Filling Class

y=0

We now define two simple conditions on the start and
end times of PGAs in a network schedule that are com- By (25), ∀x ≥ 0,
patible with sequentially valid schedules.
s

(30)
Definition 18 (First and Second Sequential Scheduling
Combining (27) and (30), ∀x ≥ 1,
Conditions). Let S be a schedule for an arbitrary filling
x−1
x−1
class ϕ = (Zϕ , Πϕ ), populated by PGTs Zϕ = {γx }x . Let
X
X
Eγx ) ≥ Eγx + tminsep
Eγx − (s0,j +
s0,j+1 +
sx,i and ex,i denote the start and end times, respectively,
γx
y=0
y=0
for the ith PGA from PGT γx . Let Eγx denote the execution time of a PGA for PGT γx . The sequential
s0,j+1 − s0,j ≥ Eγx + tminsep
(31)
γx
scheduling conditions are,
Combining (30), which holds for x ≥ 0 and (31), which
(Condition c1 ):
holds for x ≥ 1,
ex,i = sx,i + Eγx , ∀x ≥ 0,
(24)
s0,j+1 − s0,j ≥ max(Eγx + tminsep
).
(32)
γx
x
and,
(Condition c2 ):
The combined requirement from (29) and (32) is,
minsep
.
x,j+1 − sx,j ≥ Eγx + tγx

sx,i = ex−1,i , ∀x ≥ 1.
C.ii.a.

(25)


s0,j+1 − s0,j ≥ max

Calculating the required duration of sequentially valid schedules

max(Eγx + tminsep
),
γx
x

(⇐)
Suppose
the
start
∀i ∈ {0, · · · , N − 2} satisfy (26).
It follows from (26) and (28),

M
−1
X


Eγy .

y=0

times

s0,i , s0,i+1

Lemma C.3. Let ϕ = (Zϕ , Πϕ ) with Zϕ = {γ0 , ..., γM −1 }
be a filling class such that ∀γ ∈ Zϕ , the minimum alM
−1
X
location satisfies NγSI = N . Let S be a schedule for ϕ
s0,j+1 ≥
Eγx + s0,j
satisfying the sequential scheduling conditions, (24) and
y=0
(25). The schedule S is sequentially valid if and only if
s0,j+1 ≥ eM −1,j .
(33)
∀i = 0, ..., N − 2:


Condition c2 guarantees that the j th PGAs of any PGT are
 X

s0,i+1 − s0,i ≥ max  max Eγ + tminsep
,
E
.
γ
non-overlapping. Then, (33) guarantees that the (j + 1)th
γ
γ∈Zϕ
γ∈Zϕ
and j th PGAs of any PGT are non-overlapping. Since j
(26) is arbitrary, it follows that S has property c1 .
In consideration of property c2 , it follows from (26) that,
Once the start time of the very first PGA of PGT γ is
0

known, conditions (24) and (25) define a method of adding
the ith PGA of PGTs γx = {γ1 , · · · , γM −1 } to a schedule,
but these conditions do not specify how to add the (i+1)th
PGA of PGT γ0 to the schedule. For that, (26) is required
to ensure the schedule produced is sequentially valid. The
very first PGA of PGT γ0 can be added at an arbitrary
start time t0 .

36

s0,j+1 ≥ max(Eγy + tminsep
) + s0,j .
γy
y≥0

(34)

Combination of (27) for sx,j+1 with (34) gives,
sx,j+1 ≥ max(Eγy + tminsep
) + s0,j +
γy
y≥0

x−1
X
y=0

Eγy ,

(35)

γ0
γ1
..
.

γk−1
γk
γk+1
..
.
γM −1

..

..

.

..

t0

..

.

..

.

M
−1
P

..

.
n0 · c 0

Ey c0

y=0

..

.

.

.

c1 + E 0 + n 0 · c 0

t

E0 + n0 · c0

Figure 13: Example DirectAllocation schedule for a filling class ϕ populated by PGTs Zϕ = {γ0 , γ1 , · · · , γM −1 }.
In this example, N0SI = 3, hence task γ0 drops out after n0 = 2 executions of cycle c0 . Then, one final PGA for γ0 is
scheduled. All other PGTs γx in the example satisfy NxSI > 4, hence they occur in at least two executions of cycle c1 .
Here also it is illustrated that in cycle c0 , task γ0 is the task which satisfies the maximum in (48), hence the amount
of idle time inserted in c1 differs from that inserted in c0 .
which holds for x ≥ 1. Subtracting (28) from (35), for let sx,i and ex,i identify the start and end times of the
ith PGA of PGT γx added to the schedule. When the ith
x ≥ 1 gives
PGA of PGT γx is added to the schedule, the start and
sx,j+1 − ex,j ≥ max(Eγy + tminsep
) − E γx
end
times are specified by condition c1 of Lemma C.3,
γy
y≥0
≥ tminsep
.
γx

(36)

ex,i = sx,i + Eγx , ∀x ∈ {0, · · · , M − 1}.

(38)

Similarly, for x = 0, subtracting (28) for e0,j from (34) Let the term cycle 0 refer to a schedule consisting of the
gives,
) according to
ith PGA from each PGT γx ∈ ϕ (i ≤ NγSI
0
(38) and the second sequential scheduling condition (25),
s0,j+1 − e0,j ≥ max(Eγy + tminsep
) − E γ0
γy
y≥0
sx,i = ex−1,i , ∀x ∈ {0, · · · , M − 1}.
(39)
≥ tminsep
.
(37)
γ0
Let cycle 0 also include an idle time of duration I0 followSince j is arbitrary, it follows that S has property c2 , no ing the ith PGA of PGT γM −1 , so that
minsep violations occur in S.
M
−1
X
s0,i+1 = s0,i +
Ey + I 0 .
(40)
Proposition C.4. Let ϕ = (Zϕ , Πϕ ) be a filling class.
y=0
Let R(Zϕ ) = CalculateRequiredTime(Zϕ ) denote the
output of Algorithm 2. Then, R(Zϕ ) is an upper bound for Note that cycle 0 has the property that no two PGAs are
the minimum time required to execute a sequentially valid scheduled simultaneously. By the hypothesis, supposing
schedule which contains NγSI PGAs of every PGT γ ∈ Zϕ . that the required network resources to execute a PGA are
Wherever it is relevant to do so, throughout the proof of
Proposition C.4 we refer to Figure 13. Note that the Figure is not required for any of the arguments in the proof.
The Figure simply provides a visual illustration of the concepts introduced in the proof, easing their comprehension.
Proof. To upper bound the minimum amount of time required to execute NγSI PGAs of every PGT γ ∈ Zϕ such
that no two PGAs are scheduled simultaneously and no
minsep violations occur, it is sufficient to account for the
time required, R, to execute a specific schedule that meets
these criteria. We first describe a method of scheduling
PGAs based on the conditions in Lemma C.3 and which
leverages the possibility of inserting idle time into a schedule. We then demonstrate that this method of scheduling
results in a particularly simple calculation of the required
time R.
Let M = |Zϕ | and let X be an ordering of Zϕ such that
NγSI
≤ NγSI
, ∀x ∈ {0, · · · , M − 1}. As in Lemma C.3,
x
x+1
37

available, it is possible to schedule a PGA as long as doing so does not introduce a minsep violation. Since cycle 0
meets the conditions that no two PGAs are scheduled simultaneously and no minsep violations occur, it is possible
to commence the schedule with an iteration of cycle 0. In
Figure 13, an iteration of cycle 0 with idle time I0 = 0
is illustrated between time t0 and the first dotted line. If
NγSI
> 2, then after the first iteration of cycle 0 all PGTs
0
γx ∈ ϕ have at least 2 PGAs which remain to be scheduled.
Let us consider a scheduling method where the objective is
to schedule an identical repetition of cycle 0. The earliest
possible start time for this repetition of cycle 0 is the earliest possibility for s0,1 . The duration of the idle time I0
included in cycle 0 is set such that s0,1 occurs as soon as
is possible, without violating the two requirements. By
Lemma C.3, with N = NγSI
, to ensure the schedule meets
0
the requirements that no two PGAs are scheduled simultaneously and no minsep violations occur, two cases can
arise for s0,1 and I0 .

Case 1: If
M
−1
X

It follows from (45), (46), (47) and Lemma C.3 (with
N = NγSI
) that if the duration cm of cycle m is
m

Eγy ≥ tminsep
∀x ∈ {0, · · · , M − 1},
γx

(41)

y=0|y̸=x

cm = max



y∈{m,···M −1}

then,
s0,1 =

M
−1
X
y=0

I0 = 0.
Case 2: If (41) doesn’t hold, there exists at least one
task x such that
M
−1
X

y=m

n0 = NγSI
−1
0

(49)

cycles. In general, nm cycles of duration cm will be scheduled by our scheduling method, with nm given by,

(43)

Eγy < tminsep
.
γx

−1

X
 M
Eγy + tminsep
,
E
γy , (48)
γy

then the schedule has the properties that no two PGAs are
scheduled simultaneously, and no minsep violations occur.
Exactly nm iterations of cycle m, with duration cm , occur before the subsequent drop out point. The first task
(task zero) will drop out after

(42)

E γy ,

max

nm = NγSI
− NγSI
.
m
m−1

y=0|y̸=x

Then,

(50)

Px

s0,1 =
I0 =

max


minsep

y∈{0,··· ,M −1}

max

y∈{0,··· ,M −1}

Eγy + tγy

(44)

,

(Eγy + tminsep
)−
γy

After y=0 ny cycles, NxSI − 1 PGAs for PGT γx have
been added to the schedule, since

M
−1
X

x
X

Eγy .

ny = n0 +

y=0

x
X

nm

y=1

y=0

= NγSI
−1+
0

Figure 13 illustrates a scenario where case 2 applies.
The first dotted line in the figure indicates the time given
by (42), and the second dotted line indicates the time given
by (44).
Let the term cycle m refer to a schedule consisting of
the ith PGA from each PGT γx ∈ ϕ such that
ex,i = sx,i + Eγx , ∀x ∈ {m, · · · , M − 1}

(45)

sx,i = ex−1,i , ∀x ∈ {m, · · · , M − 1},

(46)

x
X

(NγSI
− NγSI
)
y
y−1

y=1

=

x
X

NγSI
−
y

y=0

x−1
X

NγSI
−1
y

y=0

= NγSI
− 1.
x
After it’s drop out point, each task is scheduled one final time. In total these individual executions contribute
M
−1
P
an amount of time
Eγy to the required time. In to-

and the ith PGA of PGT γM −1 is followed by idle time Im
so that
M
−1
X
sm,i+1 = sm,i +
Eγy + Im .
(47)

y=0

tal, following our scheduling method, the time required to
execute NγSI PGAs of every task γ ∈ Zϕ is

y=m

Note that cycle m no longer includes PGAs for the PGTs
{γ0 , · · · , γm }.
The basis of the scheduling method is to continue
scheduling cycles of PGA executions according to (45),
(46) and (47), which preserve the ordering X. However,
we only need to schedule NγSI
PGAs for PGT γx . Therex
fore, it is necessary to account for when a PGT γx drops
out of a cycle, meaning that NγSI
− 1 PGAs of the PGT
x
have already been scheduled by previous cycles. After a
drop out point, the PGT that is dropping out needs to
be scheduled a final time. Earlier we assumed NγSI
> 2.
0
In accounting for when PGTs drop-out, we address the
other possibilities, NγSI
= 1, 2. Due to the ordering X, it
0
will always be the case that the PGT or PGTs dropping
out at a drop out point are the first PGTs of the cycle.
Figure 13 illustrates a scenario wherein NγSI
= 3, hence
0
it is indicated that cycle c0 is repeated n0 = 2 times, after which point γ0 drops out, marking a transition in the
schedule from cycle 0 to cycle 1. The final execution of γ0
is scheduled before cycle 1 begins.
38

R(Zϕ ) =

M
−1
X

(nx · cx + Eγx )

(51)

x=0

= CalculateRequiredTime(Zϕ ).

C.iii.

(52)

The Compute Schedule process produces
valid schedules

In this section we first extend the definition of sequentially
valid schedules, which is only suitable for schedules covering a single filling class, to a definition of valid schedules
for multiple filling classes. To do so, we first define the notion of a resource conflict. Then, we analyze the Compute
Schedule process (Algorithm 3). This process includes a
minimal allocation phase that relies on the DirectAllocation (Algorithm 6) subroutine and a bonus allocation
phase that relies on the RoundRobinBonus (Algorithm
7) subroutine. We prove that the schedules produced by
Compute Schedule are valid and always include a minimum allocation of PGAs for every active PGT.

Definition 19 (Resource Conflict). Let Φ be a set of filling classes and ZΦ the set of active PGTs in Φ. Let S be
a schedule for the PGTs ZΦ with start times sγ,i and end
times eγ,i for the ith scheduled PGA of PGT γ, ∀γ ∈ ZΦ .
We say a resource conflict occurs in S if ∃γ, γ ′ , ∃i, j
such that
ξ(πγ ) ∩ ξ(πγ′ ) ̸= ∅,
and
sγ,i ≤ sγ ′ ,j < eγ,i .
Definition 20 (Valid schedule). A schedule is said to be
valid if it has the following two properties:
1. No resource conflicts occur, and
2. No minsep violations occur.
Note that the first condition of a valid schedule, prohibiting resource conflicts, is a weaker condition than the
first condition of a sequentially valid schedule, prohibiting any two PGAs from being scheduled simultaneously.
The later condition guarantees that there are no resource
conflicts within the same filling class, but it would also prevent simultaneously scheduling PGAs from different filling
classes, even if they do not have overlapping resource requirements.
Corollary C.5. The DirectAllocation scheduling algorithm (Algorithm 6) implements the specific scheduling
method described in the proof of Proposition C.4.
Proof. The result follows by direct comparison of Algorithm 6 and the proof of Proposition C.4.
By
Corollary
C.5
and
Proposition
C.4,
DirectAllocation produces a valid schedule for a
filling class ϕ = (Zϕ , Πϕ ) which requires an execution
time R(Zϕ ) = CalculateRequiredTime(Zϕ ), as given
by the output of Algorithm 2. We subsequently refer to
this method of scheduling simply as direct allocation.
Proposition C.4 makes it possible to account for the
duration of a valid schedule for a single filling class. To
progress towards proving Theorem V.2, it is necessary to
account for the duration of a valid schedule for a set of
filling classes. The next results build towards the required
accounting.
It is possible for a set of filling classes
Θ = {θ0 , θ1 , · · · , θM −1 } to have the property of being totally ordered, according to some ordering ≥. If
Θ is totally ordered by an arbitrary ordering ≥, then
θi−1 ≥ θi ≥ θi+1 ∀i ∈ {0, 1, · · · , M − 1}.
In general a
set of filling classes Φ may only be partially ordered
by an arbitrary ordering ≥, in which case there exist
incomparable elements ϕ and ψ such that neither ϕ ≥ ψ,
nor ψ ≥ ϕ.

where R(Zθl ) = CalculateRequiredTime(Zθl ) is the
output of Algorithm 2.
Proof. To upper bound the minimum amount of time required to execute NγSI PGAs of every PGT γ ∈ ZΘ , we
build upon the proof of Proposition C.4 and calculate the
time required to execute a specific schedule for Θ including
NγSI executions of each PGT γ ∈ ZΘ .
Let M be the number of filling classes in Θ. By the
hypothesis, Θ is totally ordered, according to some particular ordering ≥, such that θ0 ≥ θ1 ≥ · · · ≥ θM −1 . The
only restrictions which can disallow scheduling a PGA at
a certain time are that it would introduce a resource conflict or a minsep violation. By Lemma C.1, every PGT γ
is associated with a single filling class. Since minsep violations may only occur between PGAs of the same PGT,
no minsep violations may occur between PGTs in different filling classes. Hence, in building a schedule for Θ it
is always possible to schedule back-to-back executions of
a sequentially valid schedule for filling class θl and a sequentially valid schedule for filling class θl+1 . With the
given ordering, the greatest element is scheduled first, and
back-to-back executions mean that the start time of the
schedule for filling class θl+1 is equal to the end time of the
schedule for filling class θl . In this scheme no two PGAs
are ever scheduled simultaneously, hence no resource conflicts can occur.
To construct a specific schedule for Θ, it is thus sufficient to proceed by using direct allocation scheduling to
schedule NγSI executions of all PGTs γ ∈ Zθ0 . By Proposition C.4, this schedule has duration R(Zθ0 ). To continue
construction of the schedule for Θ, use direct allocation
scheduling to construct a schedule for each filling class
θl , l ∈ {2, · · · , M − 1} and append this schedule to the
end of the schedule for filling class θl−1 . The total time
required to execute this specific schedule for Θ is
R̃(ZΘ ) =

M
−1
X

R(Zθl ).

l=0

The ordering ≥ξ introduced in Definition 14 serves as an
example of a specific ordering which may totally order the
filling classes Θ in Proposition C.6. Two filling classes are
incomparable under ≥ξ whenever ξ(ϕ) ∩ ξ(ψ) = ∅. The
following theorem extends the result of Proposition C.6
from a set of totally ordered filling classes to a set of
well-behaved filling classes, partially ordered by ≥ξ , as in
Definition 14. The extension is non-trivial, and requires
accounting for how the totally ordered subsets of Φ can
be consistently added to a schedule without introducing
resource conflicts.
Proposition C.6. Let Θ be a totally ordered set of filling
A set Φ that is partially ordered by an order ≤ contains
classes conforming to Definition 8. Let ZΘ denote the
totally ordered subsets. If Θ = {θ0 , θ1 , θ2 } is a totally orset of active PGTs in Θ. The minimum time required to
dered subset of Φ, then {θ0 }, {θ1 }, {θ2 }, {θ0 , θ1 }, {θ1 , θ2 },
execute a valid schedule in which there are NγSI PGAs of
and {θ0 , θ2 } are also totally ordered subsets of Φ. In this
every PGT γ ∈ ZΘ is upper bounded by the quantity
example, only Θ is a candidate for a maximally sized toX
R̃(ZΘ ) =
R(Zθl ),
(53) tally ordered subset of Φ, as all of the other totally ordered
subsets listed are subsets of Θ.
θl ∈Θ
39

Theorem C.7. (Good Accounting) Let Φ be a set
of well-behaved filling classes, partially ordered by ≥ξ .
Let ZΦ denote the set of active PGTs in Φ.
Let
Ω = {Θ0 , Θ1 , · · · , Θn } be the set of all totally ordered subsets of Φ, of which there are a number n, for some
n ∈ N, n ≥ 0. The minimum time required to execute a
valid schedule in which there are NγSI PGAs of every PGT
γ ∈ ZΦ is upper bounded by
R(ZΦ ) = max R̃(ZΘi ),
Θi ∈Ω

(54)

where R̃(ZΘi ) is given by (53).
Proof. (Good Accounting.) Suppose that path partition
Π describes an internally connected network. Let Ωmax be
the set of maximally sized elements of Ω,
Ωmax := {Θi ∈ Ω | ∀i′ ̸= i, Θi 
⊂ Θi′ },

(55)

until we arrive at an element j ≤ min(k, k ′ ) such that
(ω \ ϕj−1 ) ∩ (ω ′ \ ϕ′j−1 ) = ∅.
As a remark, note that a singleton ω = ϕ ∈
Φ can be a maximal element of Ω as long as
ξ(Πϕ ) ∩ ξ(Πϕ′ ) = ∅, ∀ϕ′ ̸= ϕ ∈ Φ.
We now proceed to construct a schedule S for Φ, with
start time t0 , by constructing schedules ∀ω ∈ Ωmax .
For every ω ∈ Ωmax , identify αω , the unique greatest element of ω according to the order ≥ξ . The existence of this unique greatest element is guaranteed by
Lemma C.2. Let Sω be a direct allocation schedule for
αω with start time sαω = t0 . By Corollary C.5, the
end time of the schedule Sω is eαω = t0 + R(αω ). Define ω̃ = ω \ αω , a temporary update of ω excluding the
greatest element. Now, by Lemma C.2, ω̃ has a unique
greatest element βω , according to the order ≥ξ . Append
to schedule Sω a direct allocation schedule for βω with
start time sβω = eαω . By Corollary C.5, the end time
of the schedule Sω is eβω = t0 + R(αω ) + R(βω ). Update
ω̃ = ω \ {αω , βω }. Continue in this manner until there are
no remaining filling classes in ω̃, i.e. until ω̃ = ∅. Then,
Sω is a schedule for ω constructed in the manner of the
proof of Proposition
P C.6 which has start time t0 and end
time eω = t0 +
R(ϕω ). Hence the required execution

where the inclusion ⊂ is the usual set inclusion. Whenever
Ω ̸= ∅, it follows by definition that Ωmax ̸= ∅. Note that
∀ϕ ∈ Φ, ∃ω ∈ Ωmax such that ϕ ∈ ω. Therefore, Ωmax contains a total number of elements m such that 0 ≤ m ≤ n.
Denote the elements as Ωmax = {ω0 , ω1 , · · · , ωm−1 }. Consider elements ω, ω ′ ∈ Ωmax , where ω = {ϕ0 , . . . , ϕk−1 }
consists of k filling classes ordered by ≥ξ , and
ω ′ = {ϕ′0 , · · · , ϕ′k′ −1 } consists of k ′ filling classes ordered
ϕ∈ω
by ≥ξ . The ordering implies that ϕ0 is the greatest eletime
of
S
is
R̃(ω),
as given by (53).
ω
ment of ω under ≥ξ and ϕ′0 is the greatest element of ω ′
Claim 1 ensures that ∀ω, ω ′ ∈ Ωmax the schedules Sω ,
under ≥ξ . As a preliminary, we prove the following claim:
Sω′ are consistent, meaning if ∃ϕ ∈ ω ∩ ω ′ , then the start
time sϕω assigned to ϕ in schedule Sω is the same as the
Claim 1: Whenever ω ∩ ω ′ ̸= ∅, then for some index
′
′
th start time sϕω′ assigned to ϕ in schedule Sω ′ ,
0 ≤ j ≤ min(k, k ), ω and ω are identical up to this j
element. That is, ϕ0 = ϕ′0 , ϕ1 = ϕ′1 , · · · , ϕj−1 = ϕ′j−1 .
s =s .
(60)
ϕω

ϕω ′

We proceed recursively and by contradiction. In the It follows immediately that
base case, suppose for the sake of contradiction that ϕ0 ̸=
ϕ′0 . Since ω ∩ ω ′ ̸= ∅, ∃ϕ such that ϕ ∈ ω and ϕ ∈ ω ′ .
eϕω = eϕω′ ,
(61)
Since ϕ0 , ϕ′0 are respectively the greatest elements of ω
since in both Sω and Sω′ , the schedule for ϕ is a direct
and ω ′ under the ordering ≥ξ ,
allocation schedule with start times obeying (60).
ξ(Πϕ ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕ0 ),
(56)
Therefore, ∀ω, ω ′ ∈ Ωmax , the schedules Sω , Sω′ are
′
ξ(Πϕ ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕ′0 ).
(57) either independent, which happens when ω ∩ ω = ∅, or
else the schedules are consistent. To construct the full
Therefore, ξ(Πϕ0 ) ∩ ξ(Πϕ′0 ) ̸= ∅. There are three possible schedule S, it is therefore sufficient to loop through the
cases. In the first case, ξ(Πϕ0 ) = ξ(Πϕ′0 ), and we arrive schedules Sω , ∀ω ∈ Ωmax . For every schedule Sω , ∀ϕ ∈ ω,
at the contradiction that ϕ0 = ϕ′0 , since Φ is well-behaved. if S does not already include the start time sϕ and end
In the second case,
time eϕ for ϕ, these start and end times are added to S.
This method guarantess that no resource conflicts occur
ξ(Πϕ0 ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕ′0 ).
(58) in S. Furthermore, since ∀ϕ ∈ Φ, ∃ω ∈ Ωmax such that
ϕ ∈ ω, the schedule S constructed in this manner includes
Then,
a direct allocation schedule ∀ϕ ∈ Φ. Hence, the schedule
′′
′
ω = {ϕ0 , ϕ0 , ϕ1 , · · · , ϕk−1 }
(59)
S includes NγSI PGAs of every PGT γ ∈ ZΦ such that no
is a totally ordered subset of Φ such that ω ⊂ ω ′′ , and we minsep violations occur.
arrive at the contradiction that ω 
∈ Ωmax . In the third
Let ω ∗ ∈ Ωmax indicate a set with schedule Sω∗ which
case, ξ(Πϕ′0 ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕ0 ) and the argument follows the same is a solution to
logic as in the second case.
Sω∗ = max
R̃(Zω ),
(62)
If (ω \ ϕ0 ) ∩ (ω ′ \ ϕ′0 ) = ∅, then ω, ω ′ are only identiω∈Ωmax
cal up to the 1st element. Otherwise, we can repeat the
argument from the base case with ω \ ϕ0 and ω \ ϕ′0 as where Zω denotes the set of PGTs which occupy the set
the basis. This recursive argumentation can be repeated of filling classes ω. Whenever Ωmax ̸= ∅, there exists such
40

an ω ∗ , Sω∗ , which need not be unique. The amount of
time required to execute the schedule S is the amount of
time required to execute Sω∗ . This concludes the proof in
the case that the path partition Π describes an internally
connected network.

C.iii.a.

Admit Tasks is Sound

For the Admit Tasks process to be sound, it must guarantee that newly accepted demands do not disrupt existing
service agreements ((C3)). Before proceeding, it is useful
to introduce definitions describing the availability of resources and how much time has already been reserved on
In the case that the path partition Π describes a net- a network resource.
work that is disconnected, partition Π into it’s internally
connected sub-networks. The preceding proof then applies Definition 21 (Resource Availability). A resource is
to each internally connected sub-network. Let {S} denote available between times t1 and t2 if there are no scheduled
the set of schedules produced for the set of internally con- PGAs for any PGTs at any time between t1 and t2 . The
nected sub-networks. The schedules S ∈ {S} are inde- total amount of time available on each resource r ∈ R
pendent and have no resource conflicts since the schedules is a non-negative number
are for sub-networks of the path partition, which have no
Tξr ∈ [0, T SI ].
(65)
resources in common. Each schedule S ∈ {S} has start
time t0 and some end time eS ≥ t0 . Therefore, the set of Definition 22 (Time Reserved on a Resource). Let r ∈ R
schedules S ∈ {S} constructs a schedule S for Φ in which and let Tξr be the total amount of time available on r. A
NγSI PGAs of every PGT γ ∈ Φ are scheduled, no minsep duration of time T is reserved on resource r by decreconflicts occur, and no resource conflicts occur. Moreover, menting the available time by T ,
∃S ∗ with end time eS ∗ which satisfies eS ∗ = max eS . The
S∈{S}
Tξr ← Tξr − T.
(66)
schedule S has required execution time eS ∗ = R(Φ), given
by (54).
We say it is possible to reserve time T on resource r if
(66) is positive. A reservation of time with duration T
may be canceled by incrementing the available time on
resource r by T ,
Corollary C.8. The MinimalAllocation function (AlTξr ← Tξr + T.
gorithm 3) implements the specific scheduling method described in the proof of Theorem C.7 (Good Accounting).
Note that in the proofs of Propositions C.4 and C.6 it
was assumed that the required network resources to exProof. The result follows by direct comparison of Algo- ecute a PGT are available. It remains to be shown that
rithm 3 and the proof of Theorem C.7. In particular, Algorithm 5 guarantees that a PGT is only accepted if it is
note that the MinimalAllocation function in Com- possible to reserve sufficient time on the required network
puteSchedule makes use of the partial ordering of the resources.
filling classes in building the schedule S with start time
′
t0 . To construct S, ∀ϕ ∈ Φ, a direct allocation schedule Theorem C.9 (Admit Tasks is Sound). Let γ ∈ Γ, let
for ϕ is inserted into S with start time sϕ and end time Φ be a well-behaved set of filling classes with the set of
active PGTs ZΦ , and suppose ∃ϕ ∈ Φ such that πγ ′ ∈ Πϕ .
eϕ = sϕ + R(ϕ). The start time sϕ is set according to
Then, γ ′ is accepted by Admit Tasks as implemented by
X
to execute a minimal alsϕ = t0 +
R(ϕ′ ).
(63) Algorithm 5 if the time required
′
location
schedule
for
Z
+
γ
is
less
than or equal to the
Φ
ϕ ′ >ξ ϕ
scheduling interval. That is,
The identification of ϕ′ >ξ ϕ, implicitly describes that
R(ZΦ + γ ′ ) ≤ T SI ,
(67)
MinimalAllocation identifies the subset ω ⊂ Ω of all
totally ordered subsets of Φ for which ω ∩ ϕ ̸= 0. By (63), where R(·) is as in (54).
∀ϕ′ ≥ξ ϕ, sϕ′ < sϕ and moreover
Proof. Throughout, let R(Θ) denote the time required to
sϕ = max
eϕ′ ,
(64) execute a minimal allocation schedule for a set of filling
ϕ ′ >ξ ϕ
classes Θ, as given by (54), and let R(θ) denote the time
required to execute a direct allocation schedule for a single
which is exactly how sϕ is assigned in the proof of Theo- filling class θ, as given by (52) .
rem C.7.
The set of active PGTs ZΦ satisfies R(ZΦ ) ≤ T SI , as every active PGT was previously accepted by Admit Tasks.
As a consequence of Theorem C.7, given the set of fill- In the special case where there are no active PGTs, i.e.
ing classes Φ as input, the minimal allocation phase of ZΦ = ∅ and N = |ZΦ | is zero, this still holds as
Compute Schedule (Algorithm 3) produces a valid schedR(ZΦ = ∅) = 0 ⇒ R(ZΦ ) ≤ T SI .
ule which includes NγSI PGAs of every PGT γ ∈ Φ. The
schedule requires execution time R(Φ), as given by (53). In that case also
We subsequently refer to this method of scheduling simply
as minimal allocation scheduling.
Zϕ = ∅ ∧ R(Zϕ ) = 0 ∀ϕ ∈ Φ.
41

This situation must occur at least the very first time Admit Tasks executes, and may occur in some scheduling
interval k if all active PGTs expire or are terminated by
Update Filling Classes, which precedes Admit Tasks.
In the first step of AdmitTasks, the available time Tξr
on each resource r ∈ R is reset to the duration of the
scheduling interval, T SI . For each filling class ϕ ∈ Φ, the
amount of time R(Zϕ ) required to execute a direct allocation schedule is calculated. Then, ∀r ∈ ξ(Πϕ ) the time
reserved on r is incremented by R(Zϕ ). By Corollary C.8,
sequentially reserving the time required to execute a direct allocation schedule on a resource r ∈ ξ(Πϕ ), ∀ϕ, is
equivalent to reserving time on the the resource according
to a minimal allocation schedule.
Let M ZΦ denote the maximum amount of time reserved
on any resource for the set of active PGTs ZΦ ,
M ZΦ := max(T SI − Tξr ).
r∈R

By Corollary C.8 this is equal to the duration of the minimal allocation schedule for ZΦ . Overall,
M ZΦ = R(ZΦ ) ≤ T SI .
At this point, the task γ ′ is considered by AdmitTasks.
By the hypothesis, ∃ϕ ∈ Φ such that πγ ′ ∈ Πϕ , so GetFillingClass returns the filling class ϕ. The next step
of AdmitTasks is to add the PGT γ ′ to Z̃ϕ = Zϕ + γ ′ ,
a temporary update of the set of active PGTs in filling
class ϕ. The Accept variable is initialized as True. The
time reservation of amount R(Zϕ ) is then canceled on every resource r ∈ ξ(Πϕ ). Next, the time R(Z̃ϕ ) required to
execute a direct allocation schedule for Z̃ϕ is calculated.
By the proof of Proposition C.4 and Corollary C.5, the
direct allocation schedule for ϕ may include idle time based
on the values of tminsep
, ∀γ ∈ Zϕ . For this reason, it is posγ
sible that the time required to execute a direct allocation
schedule of Z̃ϕ , R(Z̃ϕ ) is not substantially greater than
R(Zϕ ), and it may be that R(Z̃ϕ ) = R(Zϕ ). Canceling the
time reservation of R(Zϕ ) allows for correct comparison of
R(Z̃ϕ ) to the available time on all resources r ∈ ξ(Πϕ ).
Overall, R(Zϕ ) ≤ R(Z˜ϕ ).
For every resource r ∈ ξ(Πϕ ), the time Tξr available
on resource r is compared to the required time R(Z̃ϕ ). If
∃r ∈ ξ(Πϕ ) such that

Since we condition on all comparisons (68) passing,
Tξr − R(Z̃ϕ ) ≥ 0, ∀r ∈ ξ(Πϕ ).

(70)

Hence it is guaranteed that
′

Tξr∗ = T SI − M ZΦ +γ ≥ 0.

(71)

Combining (69) and (71),
R(ZΦ + γ ′ ) ≤ T SI .

(72)

Theorem C.9 (Admit Tasks is Sound) conditioned on
inclusion of the path πγ ′ ∈ Πϕ for some ϕ ∈ Φ. The following Lemma addresses PGTs γ ′ ∈ Γ for which ∃
 ϕ such
that πγ ′ ∈ Πϕ . This can happen in a network with a dynamically evolving network resource graph. For example,
if a resource on the path πγ becomes unresponsive between
the time at which the demand was registered and the time
at which Γ is retreived by the Network Scheduler.
Lemma C.10. Suppose γ ′ ∈ Γ and ∃
 ϕ such that
πγ ′ ∈ Πϕ . Then, γ ′ is rejected by AdmitTasks.
Proof. Let d be the demand associated with γ ′ . Let
Γd ⊆ Γ denote set PGTs in Γ associated with the demand
d. The AdmitTasks function calls the GetFillingClass function for the PGT γ ′ . If ∃
 ϕ such that πγ ′ ∈ Πϕ ,
then GetFillingClass raises a FillingClassError, the
PGT γ ′ is removed from Γd , and the PGT γ ′ is rejected
by AdmitTasks.
Remark C.11. When a PGT γ ′ which realizes a demand
d is accepted, the final step of AdmitTasks is to remove
the set of alternative PGTs Γd ⊆ Γ associated with the
same demand. Hence Γ is updated to Γ \ Γd . This ensures
that at most one PGT is admitted per demand.
C.iv.

Minimal Allocation is Guaranteed

It is now possible to prove one of our main results, Theorem V.2 (Minimal Allocation is Guaranteed). This theorem underpins the proof of Theorem V.1 (Deterministic
Satisfaction of Service Agreements) in Section V.
The following theorem assumes that the set of filling
classes is well-behaved. In our implementation of Arqon
Tξr − R(Z̃ϕ ) < 0,
(68) (Section VI) we specify a path partition and the set of
filling classes it induces. Then, we prove that this specific
then the Accept variable is set to false, the PGT γ is set of filling classes is well-behaved. This is sufficient to
removed from Γ, and γ ′ receives a reject decision. Other- demonstrate the existence of well-behaved sets of filling
wise, the value of Accept remains true, the set of active classes.
PGTs Zϕ is updated to Z̃ϕ , and the available time on each
associated resource r ∈ ξ(Z̃ϕ ) is decremented by the re- Theorem V.2 (Minimal Allocation is guaranteed).
′
quired time for the filling class, R(Z̃ϕ ). Define M ZΦ +γ Let d be a demand accepted by Arqon as the PGT
and r∗ respectively as the maximum amount of time re- γd . Suppose πγd ∈ Π in every relevant scheduling interserved on any resource due to the PGTs in ZΦ + γ ′ and val. Suppose Φ is a well-behaved set of filling classes.
the resource on which the maximum reservation occurs. Then, in every relevant scheduling interval the schedule
S = ComputeSchedule(Φ) contains at least NγSI
PGAs
By Corollary C.7,
d
of
the
PGT
γ
.
Moreover,
the
duration
of
S
does
not
exd
′
M ZΦ +γ = R(ZΦ + γ ′ ).
(69) ceed T SI .
42

Proof. By Theorem C.9, the time required to execute a
minimum allocation schedule does not exceed the scheduling interval T SI .
It remains to show that given a schedule Sk as input,
the bonus allocation phase of Compute Schedule cannot
extend the required execution time of the schedule Sk to
beyond T SI . The BonusAllocation function in Algorithm 3 for Compute Schedule takes the schedule Sk as
input, and ∀ϕ ∈ Φ, it returns an update of the schedule,
Sk = RoundRobinBonus(ϕ, Sk ). RoundRobinBonus,
given by Algorithm 7 may insert PGAs of a PGT γ into
the schedule Sk . Before any PGA may be added, the following condition is checked:
test + Eγ < T SI .

(73)

Algorithm 9: Simplified representation of
RoundRobinBonus.
Function RoundRobinBonus:
Input : Filling class ϕ, network schedule
S input .
Output: Updated network schedule S.
Set T rel ← {};
Set test ← 0;
Set k ← 0;
while test < T SI do
S, T̂ rel ← f (S, T rel , test );
Set
test , T rel ← nextStartTime(S, T̂ rel , test );
end
end

Condition (73) ensures that a PGA is only added to schedule Sk if the time required to execute the updated schedule
Sk does not exceed T SI . Hence, after all updates are made and
to Sk in the bonus allocation phase, the time required to
test
execute Sk does not exceed T SI .
0 = 0,

T0rel = ∅,

T̂0rel = ∅,

S0 = S input .

(76)

Note that NextStartTime removes a release time
from the set of release times to consider if it is the next
start time, so in general T̂krel ̸= Tkrel .
Similarly, if a PGA is scheduled, then f will add a
We now develop the complexity analysis of the Network release time to the set of release times to consider, so
Scheduler, from which we derive and prove Theorem VII.1 T rel ̸= T̂ rel in general.
i
i+1
in Section VII. We calculate the complexity in terms of the
We first show that the next earliest start time test
is
k
number of active PGTs N = |ZΦ | in the set of filling classes smaller than any remaining release times to consider.
Φ, the number of active PGTs Nϕ = |Zϕ | in a single filling
rel
class ϕ, the number of PGTs k = |Γ| in the task intake Lemma D.1. test
k < min Tk .
object, and the number of internal resources R = |R|.
To bound the complexity of a process, it must eventu- Proof. Recall that δ = (γ, t; r) ∈ S̃ is a PGA for PGT
ally halt on any input. Unlike the other processed of the γ scheduled at start time t on resourceendr in a schedule
Network Scheduler, which are based on loops with a finite S̃. The end time of such a PGA δ is tδ = t + Eγ . We
There are two
number of iterations, the bonus allocation phase is based examine the affect of nextStartTime.
end
′
cases
to
consider.
If
min{t
:
δ
∈
S
}
<
min
T̂krel , then
δ
k
on RoundRobinBonus, which contains a while loop.
To bound the operational complexity of RoundRobinend
test
: δ ∈ S ′ } < min T̂krel = min Tkrel .
k = min{tδ
Bonus, it is necessary to demonstrate that this algorithm
halts on any input.
: δ ∈ Sk′ }, then
Otherwise, if min T̂krel ≤ min{tend
δ
In this Appendix we first prove that RoundRobinBonus halts on any input, and then we bound the com- test = min T̂ rel , and T rel = T̂ rel \{test } =⇒ test < min T rel .
k
k
k
k
k
k
plexity of each process of NetworkScheduler.

D.

D.i.

Complexity Analysis of the
Network Scheduler

Round Robin Bonus Halts

To prove that RoundRobinBonus, Algorithm 7, halts on
any input we need to show that in finite time the earliest
start time test is updated by RoundRobinBonus to a
value that exceeds the scheduling interval, test > T SI .
Let us simplify the representation of the algorithm in
the following manner:
In Algorithm 9 the function f represents the action of
the for loop in Algorithm 7.
To prove that the algorithm halts, we need the sequences
Si , T̂irel , Tirel and test
i , where
rel
Si+1 , T̂i+1
= f (Si , Tirel , test
i ),
rel
rel
est
test
i+1 , Ti+1 = nextStartTime(Si+1 , T̂i+1 , ti ),

Next we show that new release times are only added
when test is the end time of a PGA in the schedule.
Lemma D.2. Suppose that for some test
k , ∄δ ∈ Sk such
end
that test
k = tδ . Then, following the application of f as
rel
in (74), T̂k+1
= Tkrel , i.e. no release times are added by f .

Proof. Suppose not. Then there exists some time t∗ such
rel
that t∗ ∈ T̂k+1
but t∗ ̸∈ Tkrel . This implies there exists a
minsep
∗
PGA δ from a PGT γ ∗ such that t∗ = tend
and
δ ∗ + tγ ∗
est
end
est
tk−1 < tδ∗ ≤ tk .
end
As test
k−1 < tδ ∗ , by the action of nextStartTime we
est
end
est
end
(74) must have that tk ≤ tδ∗ . This implies that tk = tδ∗ .
est
But this contradicts the assumption that tk is not an end
(75) time of any scheduled PGA and so no such δ ∗ , t∗ exist.
43

We now show that test
i , which is updated in each loop the number of release times in the set of release times
′
of RoundRobinBonus by nextStartTime is strictly in- cannot increase until test
= tend
l
δ ′ for some δ ∈ S∞ . Hence
rel
rel
creasing.
for k + 1 ≤ i ≤ l, |T̂irel | ≤ |T̂k+1
|. Furthermore, |T̂k+1
| <
|Z
|
<
∞
as
each
PGT
can
only
contribute
one
release
Φ
est
Lemma D.3. For all i > 0, test
end
i+1 − ti > 0.
time. Therefore, after at most l = |ZΦ | steps, test
k+l = tδ ′
′
for
some
δ
∈
S
.
∞
Proof. We proceed by induction on the iteration index i.
For the base case i = 0. Consider the action of f on
Corollary D.5 (Visit every end time). Let δ be a PGA
S0 , T0rel , test
0 . The only way for a new time to be added
in S∞ with end time tend
rel
δ . Then there exists some k < ∞
to T is from a past minsep violation. As there are no
such that test
= tend
.
k
δ
PGAs scheduled before time t = 0, there cannot be any
past minsep violations at test
0 . Therefore, there are no new Proof. As PGAs can only be scheduled at the current
release times added to T0rel by f and so T̂1rel = T0rel = ∅.
value of test , any new end times are in the future and
Now consider the action of nextStartTime on will therefore not be skipped over. The number of PGAs
rel
S1 , T̂1rel , test
= ∅ and nextStartTime only re- in S∞ is countable, therefore let us enumerate them by
0 . As T̂
moves elements from T̂ rel , we must have T1rel = ∅. More- δ0 , δ1 , ... such that tend ≤ tend . Then by the previous
δi
δi+1
over, there are no release times to consider, and so the corollary we have that there exists some l < k|Z | such
Φ
next earliest start time must come from the earliest end that test = tend .
l
δk
time of a PGA in S1 , i.e.
Finally, we show that for every time c > 0, test
exceeds
k
end
test
=
min
t
≥
min
E
>
0,
(77)
γ
1
δ
c
in
a
finite
number
of
steps.
γ∈ZΦ
δ∈S1
and the base case follows.
Suppose now that the result holds for all i ≤ k. We
need to consider two cases, whether test
k+1 is an end time
rel
of a PGA in Sk+1 or whether it is a release time in T̂k+1
.
In the first case, we have that nextStartTime explicitly
only considers PGAs with end times greater than test
k and
est
so we must have test
k+1 > tk . In the latter case, suppose
rel
that ∃t∗ ∈ T̂k+1
such that t∗ < test
k , i.e. nextStartTime
est
would choose tk+1 = t∗ .
rel
There are two ways for t∗ to get into T̂k+1
, either carried
forward from (75) in iteration k or from (74) in iteration
k + 1. By Lemma D.1 the time returned by nextStartTime is less that the minimum value in Tkrel , so it must be
that t∗ was added by f as in (74), in iteration k + 1. In
particular, ∃δ ∗ ∈ Sk such that δ ∗ is a left-minsep violation
minsep
∗
end
for some PGT γ ∗ at time test
> test .
k , i.e. t = tδ ∗ +tγ ∗
∗
est
∗
This contradicts that t < t , and so no such t can exist.
est
Therefore, test
and the result follows.
k+1 > tk

Lemma
D.6. For each filling class ϕ ∈ Φ,
BonusRoundRobin(ϕ, S input )
generates
the
sequences (74) and (75) such that ∀c ≥ 0 there exists
k < ∞ for which test
k ≥ c.

Proof. As every PGT in Zϕ has a finite expiry time, after
which no further PGAs are scheduled, there are only a
finite number of PGAs in S∞ . We consider two cases,
c < maxδ∈S∞ tend
and c ≥ maxδ∈S∞ tend
δ
δ . In the former
case, there exists some end time tend
δ ∗ > c. By Corollary D.5, the sequence (test
)
reaches
tend
i
δ ∗ in finite time
and so exceeds c in finite time.
In the latter case, consider the values that (test
i ) takes
after reaching the last end time in S∞ . Let k be such
rel
= maxδ∈S∞ tend
that test
k
δ , and let T̂k+1 be the set of release times to consider after test
.
As
each PGT can only
k
rel
contribute at most one release time to T̂k+1
, we have
rel
r = |T̂k+1 | ≤ |Zϕ | < ∞. Furthermore, we have that
rel
rel
| − 1 for i = 1, ..., r. Therefore, we have
|T̂k+i+1
| = |T̂k+i
rel
est
that
T̂
=
∅.
Moreover, at test
We now show that the sequence tk visits the end time
k+r
k+r there are no future
end
times
(as
nothing
can
be
added
to schedule which
of every scheduled PGA in a finite number of steps. To
end
est
ends
after
max
t
<
t
)
and
no
release times as
do so, we introduce the notation
δ∈S∞ δ
k+r
rel
T̂k+r = ∅. Therefore, the action of nextStartTime is
est
S∞ := lim Sk .
(78) to set test
k+r+1 = ∞ > c. Therefore (ti ) hits ∞ in a fik→∞
nite number of time steps and hence exceeds c in a finite
As Sk is strictly increasing, in the sense that PGAs can number of time steps.
only be added to a schedule, this limit is well-defined.
Note that in the limit k → ∞ we don’t impose a cutoff at
We can now prove that RoundRobinBonus(ϕ, S)
the end of a scheduling interval, and instead assume the
functions f and NextStartTime are applied as long as halts on all inputs.
the algorithm does not halt.
Theorem
D.7. For all possible inputs ϕ, S,
Corollary D.4 (Finite number of steps between end RoundRobinBonus(ϕ, S) halts.
end
times). Let test
be the end time of a PGA
k < maxδ∈S∞ tδ
Proof. Suppose not. Then the algorithm must enter an
in S∞ . Then ∃l < ∞ such that test
k+l is also the end time
infinite loop somewhere. The For loop has finite numof a PGA in S∞ .
ber of steps, |Zϕ |, so will always exit. We define a ‘cycle’
est
end
Proof. Consider test
for
i
>
k.
If
t
=
̸
t
,
for
some
of the round-robin scheduler to be each time the While
′
i
i
δ
δ ′ ∈ S∞ , then test
must
be
a
release
time.
By
Lemma
D.2,
condition is checked. Note that each cycle the value of
i
44

test is incremented by nextStartTime as per the sequences (74), (75) and by Lemma D.3 test increases with
each cycle. The program halts when test > T SI . By
Lemma D.6 this occurs in a finite number of cycles and so
the program will always halt.

O(N R) time. Subsequently, updating the set of removed
tasks requires creating and assigning a list of length O(N ).
Therefore, building the set of filling classes takes O(1)
time if there is no change to the path partition and
O(R2 + N R + N ) time otherwise.
To remove the terminated and expired demands, each
filling
class ϕ ∈ Φ is treated in turn. For a given filling
D.ii. Complexity Analysis
class ϕ with Nϕ active PGTs, each PGT is iterated over
We determine the complexity of NetworkScheduler and if it is in the set of terminated demands it is removed,
as in Algorithm 1 by examining each of the sub- or if it has expired it is removed. Checking if a PGT is in
routines: UpdateFillingClasses, AdmitTasks, and the terminated set is an O(1) operation (set membership).
ComputeSchedule.
Checking if a PGT has expired is also an O(1) operation.
Therefore, removing the terminated or expired PGTs takes
O(Nϕ ) time.
D.ii.a. Update Filling Classes
After the PGTs are removed, the required time is reFirst, we examine the complexity of UpdateFilling- calculated (CalculateRequiredTime(ϕ), implemented
Classes, Algorithm 4, as implemented in Listing 5.
by lines 52-63 in Listing 6), at a cost of O(Nϕ2 ) – see
Lemma D.9. Therefore, updating each filling class takes
Lemma D.8. UpdateFillingClasses as implemented O(N 2 ) time, for a total of O(N 2 ) time across all filling
ϕ
in listing 5 has operational complexity O((N + R)2 ).
classes.
Updating the lists of removed and expired demands are
Proof. The algorithm is split into two phases: building the
O(Nϕ ) or O(N ) ((once we sum over all filling classes) opset of filling classes from Π and then removing terminated
erations, so are sub-leading.
and expired demands from each filling class.
Therefore, the overall complexity is
If the path partition is unchanged, the old set of filling
classes can be brought forward and there are no required
O(R2 + N R + N ) + O(N 2 ) = O((N + R)2 ).
operations. Otherwise, we build a set of filling classes from
the new path partition. We create one filling class per cell
of the path partition, then sort them and finally create a
dictionary holding the ordering. Creating a filling class is D.ii.b. Admit Tasks
an O(1) operation, as it only requires value assignment.
To calculate how many filling classes there can be, con- We now show the complexity of Admit Tasks, Algorithm 5,
sider the specific choice of filling classes given in Defini- as implemented by Listing 4. It makes use of some of
tion 13. Let |B| be the number of long-distance backbones, the methods of a filling class, implemented in Listing 6.
|J| the number of junction nodes and |I| be the number First we determine the operational complexity of CalculateRequiredTime, which Admit Tasks uses to reserve
of EGIs in the network, so |B| + |J| + |I| = R.
There is a single backbone partition ΠB . Each set of time for the minimum allocation of PGAs of active PGTs
junction nodes Ji is disjoint, and so there are at most on all resources associated with a filling class.
|J| junction filling classes. Each EGI contributes a filling
class, so there are I EGI filling classes. Therefore there Lemma D.9. CalculateRequiredTime(ϕ) for a fillin Listing 6 has operational
are at most 1 + |J| + |I| < R filling classes, and so there ing class ϕ as implemented
2
complexity
O(N
).
ϕ
are O(R) filling classes.
Creating all of the filling classes is thus O(R). Sorting Proof. Calculating the total required time requires calcuthe set of filling classes is O(R log(R)). Computing the lating the vector of cycle times cϕ = (cϕ ) and the vector of
i
dictionary holding the ordering requires a double iteration cycle numbers nϕ = (nϕ ) as in the proof of Proposition C.4
i
2
of the list of filling classes, which takes O(R ) time. The
in Appendix C. Calculating each of the nϕi each requires
implementation of these processes is given in Listing 7.
a single value assignment and subtraction, an O(1) operThe remaining assignments in lines 14-16 of Listing 7
ation, for a total of O(Nϕ ) operations.
take O(1) time, because a None value is always assigned
Calculating cϕk has the following steps: We obtain the
in NetworkScheduler. These properties are never initialized in this main loop and are only initialized in the list of end times plus minseps for each PGT with index
numeric complexity evaluations of Section VIII, resulting greater than or equal to k, which has complexity O(N −k).
in Figures 11 and 12. The overall complexity of construct- Obtaining the sum of the execution times is also O(N −k).
Finding the maximum of this list and the sum of the exing the set of filling classes is thus O(R2 ).
ecutions times is an O(log(N − k)) operation. Combining
If the path partition changes, we attempt to re-add each
these three steps, the total complexity for computing each
PGT γ to a filling class. This requires an O(R) lookup to
of the cϕk is O(N − k). The total complexity for computing
find the correct filling class and then O(1) time to add γ
PNϕ −1
ϕ
2
to the filling class. Note that re-calculating the minimum the ci is then k=0 O(Nϕ − k) = O(Nϕ ).
Once we have the nϕi and the cϕi terms, we need to calculate nϕ .cϕ , which requires O(Nϕ ) multiplications, O(Nϕ )

required time for the filling class is delayed until the end
of this whole routine. Therefore, re-adding PGTs takes

45

additions and one value assignment, for an overall complexity of O(Nϕ ).
Combining these calculations, the total complexity is
2

O(Nϕ ) + O(Nϕ )

+ O(Nϕ ) = O(Nϕ2 ).

Therefore, determining an accept/reject decision for a
PGT γ has total complexity

(79)

O(R) + O(Nϕ2 ) + O(R) + O(1) = O(Nϕ2 ) + O(R).

Each demand in Γ contributes at most one PGT into Zϕ ,
so we can bound |Nϕ | above by N + k, and the total complexity of making a determination for γ is O((N +k)2 +R)
Theorem D.10. AdmitTasks as implemented in ListFor each possible path π along which PGAs for a
ing 4, operating on a set of filling classes Φ as implemented
demand d can be realized, there is a constant finite
in Listing 7, has operational complexity
number of entanglement generation protocols which can
number of possible
2
R
2
O(k[(N + k) + R]2 + R ).
(80) be employed. Therefore, the total
PGTs for a given demand is O(2R ). There are k deProof. Initially AdmitTasks calculates and sets the cur- mands for which a decision needs to be made. Thererent available time on each resource r ∈ R. Setting the fore the overall computational complexity is given by
2
R
2
initial available time of a full scheduling interval requires O(k[(N + k) + R]2 + R ).
O(R) value assignments (each O(1)). In our implementation of the filling classes the total required time is stored D.ii.c. Compute Schedule
as a property of a filling class, so we can get the total reWe determine the complexity of Compute Schedule by first
quired time in O(1) (amortized) time. Each filling class is
determining the complexity of it’s subprocesses. Fundaassociated with O(R) resources, so decrementing the time
mentally, computing schedules requires adding PGAs to
available (O(1)) for all resources associated with a particthe network schedule, which is implemented as in Listular filling class takes O(R) time. There are O(R) filling
ing 8. Compute Schedule has three phases: minimal
classes in total, so the initialization of the routine takes
allocation, bonus allocation, and schedule compilation.
O(R2 ) + O(R) = O(R2 ) time in total.
The minimal allocation phase computes direct allocation
Next AdmitTasks determines whether to admit a parschedules (DirectAllocation, Algorithm 6, Listing 1)
ticular PGT γ ∈ Γ. To find the filling class of γ we check
for each filling class. The bonus allocation phase attempts
each filling class ϕ sequentially to determine if the path is
to add PGAs to the direct allocation schedules for each fillin the cell Πϕ of the path partition. Each filling class can
ing class, according to BonusRoundRobin, Algorithm 7,
be obtained in O(1) time (dictionary query), performing
which is implemented in Listing 2. Schedule compilation
the inclusion check is O(1) (set inclusion), and there are
(CompileSchedule) is implemented in Listing 8.
O(R) filling classes, for a total of O(R) operations.
Suppose we find a filling class ϕ for γ, and let Nϕ = |Zϕ |. Lemma D.11. Let the format of the network schedule
First, we need to remove the contribution from the PGTs be as implemented in Listing 8. Then, appending a PGA
in Zϕ to the reserved time on each resource associated to the schedule has complexity O(R). Inserting a PGA
with ϕ. Updating each of the O(R) resources takes O(1) anywhere else in the schedule has complexity O(RN ).
time (dictionary parameter query, subtraction, value asProof. The process of scheduling a PGA for a PGT γ can
signment) for a total complexity of O(R).
We can then add γ to Zϕ . To do so, first we need be decomposed into three parts. Firstly, we get the reto determine at which index in the ordering it should be source schedules for the individual resources on the path
inserted to preserve the ordering by N SI . In our imple- πγ . The network schedule is implemented as a dictiomentation this takes O(Nϕ ) time as we examine each el- nary of resource schedules keyed by their resource idenement in sequence. Once the index i is found, γ can be tifier, so we simply loop through the path πγ and retrieve
inserted into the list, which takes O(Nϕ − i) time. Finally, each schedule in turn (dictionary query, O(1)). Therefore,
adding γ to Zϕ means the minimum required time needs to the complexity of getting all the schedules to update is
be recomputed, which by Lemma D.9 takes O(Nϕ2 ) time. O(|πγ |) = O(R).
Secondly, for each resource in πγ , we need to configure
Therefore, the total operational complexity of adding γ to
the PGA(s) to be scheduled, as in lines 53-56 of Listing 8.
Zϕ is O(Nϕ ) + O(Nϕ − i) + O(Nϕ2 ) = O(Nϕ2 ).
Once the perspective PGT has been added to its filling This takes O(1) time.
Finally, we need to add the constructed PGA(s) to the
class, we need to check if R(Zϕ ) ≤ T SI , in which case
the PGT can be accepted. Updating the reserved time on resource schedule Sr . If a PGA can be appended to the
each resource associated with ϕ takes O(1) time (dictio- end of the resource schedule whilst maintaining time ornary query, addition, value assignment) Checking (float dering of all scheduled PGAs, adding the PGA has the
comparison, O(1)) that the available time for all O(R) same (amortized) complexity as appending to a list, which
is O(1). If it is not known at which index a new PGA
resources is positive takes a total of O(R) time.
If this condition is met (i.e. the PGT is accepted), then needs to be inserted to maintain time ordering, then it
updating the dictionary of accepted demands takes O(1) can be obtained using binary search in time O(log |Sr |).
time. Otherwise, if the PGT is rejected, then we need As Sr is a list of PGAs, the total number of which is
to undergo the same procedure as above but in reverse, O(N ), we have that finding the index required is O(log N ).
Let q be the index at which the new PGA should be
which has at worst the same complexity.
46

inserted. Then performing the insertion has complexity
O(|Sr | − q) = O(N ).
The total complexity of parts two and three combined
is then O(1) when appending and O(N ) otherwise. Since
these parts need to be repeated for each resource on the
path πγ , in total the complexity is O(R) when appending
and O(RN ) otherwise.
Lemma D.12. DirectAllocation(ϕ), as implemented
in Listing 1 for a filling class ϕ, operating on a network
schedule as implemented in Listing 8, has computational
complexity
O(Nϕ R) + O(Nϕ2 ).
(81)
Proof. The total P
number of PGAs to be scheduled from
filling class ϕ is γ∈ϕ NγSI = O(Nϕ ). This holds since
∀γ, NγSI is a positive integer. We proceed through Listing 1 line-by-line. In initializing the routine, lines 11-15,
we obtain the logger, set cycle_start_time and set up
one pointer for each resource. These are either value assignment or dictionary query operations, which are all
O(1).
In lines 17-45 we construct the schedule. The PGTs
in a filling class are ordered by a set of indices X
SI
such that NxSI ≤ Nx+1
. For each γx in increasing order
x = {0, 1, · · · , |Zϕ |}, we add all NγSI
PGAs for γx to the
x
schedule.
In lines 19-21 we retrieve the new cycle time (dictionary
query, O(1)) and reset the cycle counter k (value assignment, O(1)). This portion has total complexity O(1).
The two for loops, in lines 23-31 add all the PGAs
for the PGT γx to the schedule, for each cycle in turn.
For each of these PGAs, the offset of the start time from
the start of the cycle is calculated in line 25. This requires
summing the elements of a list of length order O(Nϕ ), so it
is an O(Nϕ ) operation. Then the PGA needs to be added
to the schedule. By Lemma D.11, this has complexity
O(R) as, by construction, DirectAllocation only appends PGAs to the end of resource schedules. Therefore,
the total complexity incurred from adding a PGA to the
schedule is O(R) + O(Nϕ ). Lines 33-42 simply schedule
one last PGA for each PGT following the end of it’s last
cycle, as discussed in the proof of Proposition C.4.
The total complexity is thus given by

_get_next_start_time: With the implementation of
the network schedule in Listing 8, getting the end times
to consider relies on getting each resource schedule ∀r ∈ R
(dictionary query, O(1)) and then retrieving the end time
of a specified PGA (list element retrieval at known index,
O(1)). Therefore, getting the PGA end times to consider
has a total complexity of O(R). The minimal end time
is determined by minimizing over the set of end times to
consider, an O(R) operation. Therefore, the total complexity to get the next end time is O(R) + O(R) = O(R).
The next release time is determined by minimizing over
the list of release times supplied as an input to the subroutine. Each PGT in ϕ can contribute at most one release
time to this list for a total of O(Nϕ ) elements. Therefore,
finding the next release time is O(Nϕ ). The next start
time is the minimum of the next end time and the next
release time. Calculating it takes O(1) time (comparing
two values).
If the next start time is the next end time, the set of
schedule pointers is updated. To update the pointers, for
each resource in R, we check if the pointed PGA ends before or at the next start time (dictionary query, O(1), and
list item retrieval at known index, O(1)). If so, the pointer
is incremented by two (O(1)). Therefore, the total complexity for updating the pointers is O(R). Alternatively,
if the next start time is the next release time, we remove
the next start time from the set of release times, which is
an O(1) operation.
Therefore, the contributions from getting the next end
time, the next release time, finding the minimum of these
and then updating the release times/schedule pointers
gives a total complexity of
O(R) + O(Nϕ )+O(1) + O(R)
= O(R) + O(Nϕ ).

(84)

_resources_available: To check if all the resources
required to schedule a PGA from PGT γ are available,
we perform the following steps: For each resource in πγ ,
we check if the pointed PGT is active at time test . This
consists of a dictionary query to get the resource schedule
O(1), list retrieval at a known index (O(1)) and a constant
number of comparisons (O(1)). Therefore, checking if one
resource is available at time test is an O(1) operation. The
total from checking all resources is then O(|πγ |) = O(R).
O(1) + O(Nϕ ) + O(Nϕ )(O(R) + O(Nϕ ))
_future_minsep_violations: To check if there are
2
minium
separation violations in the future for a PGA from
= O(Nϕ ) + O(Nϕ R).
(82)
PGT γ, it suffices to check only the resource schedule from
the first internal resource in πγ . Getting the relevant resource and its resource schedule is an O(1) operation (list
Lemma D.13. RoundRobinBonus(ϕ) as implemented retrieval from known index, dictionary query). Initializin Listing 2 for a filling class ϕ operating on a network ing the offset variable is also O(1). Each check which
schedule as implemented in Listing 8 has operational com- is performed is an O(1) operation (comparison, property
plexity
retrieval, value assignment). The number of scheduled
O(N 2 Nϕ R)).
(83) PGAs to check is only bounded by the size of the schedule, and so there are O(N ) checks to perform. Combining
the contributions from obtaining the resource schedule,
Proof. The overall complexity depends on the complexity initializing the counter and then performing the checks
of the subroutines which are detailed in Algorithm 8 and gives a total complexity of O(N ).
implemented in Listing 2.
_past_minsep_violations: The process is the same
47

as for _future_minsep_violations, so the complexity is
O(N ).
We now move to the main loop of the algorithm. The
maximum number of cycles is the same as the maximum
number of possible start times. Each possible start time
corresponds to the end of some PGA in the schedule, so
there are at most
T SI
= O(N )
Eγ + tminsep
γ
ϕ∈Φ γ∈Zϕ
X X

(85)

possible start times. The expression (85) dictates that
every PGT can contribute at most a number of PGAs
based on how many times the PGA duration plus minsep
fits within the scheduling interval. Thus the number of
cycles is O(N ).
In each cycle there are Nϕ rounds, during each of which
_resources_available, _future_minsep_violations,
_past_minsep_violations are called. The algorithm
may also add a PGA to the schedule, which by
Lemma D.11 takes O(RN ) time as these PGAs typically need to be inserted intro the schedule rather
than appended to the end. At the end of each cycle,
_get_next_start_time is called.
Overall, the complexity is


O(N ) O(Nϕ ) O(R) + O(N ) + O(N ) + O(N R)

+O(R) + O(Nϕ ) = O(N 2 Nϕ R).
(86)

D.iii.

Numeric Evaluation

In Section VIII we discuss the simulation of randomly generated network topologies, parametrized by the number of
long-distance backbones, local areas, and end nodes in the
network. Table 5 compiles the average schedule computation times for each of these parametrizations. The time to
compute the schedule is broken down by the processes Update Filling Classes, Admit Tasks, and Compute Schedule
(without the Compile Schedule process). The total time
to produce the network schedule includes the time for each
of these processed and Compile Schedule.

E.

Implementation: Supporting Results
and Formal Definitions

In this section we provide formal definitions for the set
of allowed edges in a network resource graph and for the
set of allowed entanglement generation paths that we consider in our implementation of Arqon. Then, we prove the
supporting results Lemma VI.1 and Lemma E.1 describing the properties of the specific choice of path partition
and the set of filling classes it induces. Finally, we discuss
our methods of setting the duration of a PGA for a given
ppacket .
E.i.

Allowed Edges in a Network Resource
Graph

Definition 23 (Set of Allowed Edges, E ∗ ). Let vi , vj ∈ V
be two vertices in the network resource graph. An edge
e = (vi , vj ) is an allowed edge if the following conditions
are
satisfied:
Lemma D.14. Given that the network schedule is implemented as in Listing 8, CompileSchedule has oper1. If vi ∈ E then vj ∈ I. Reflexively, if vj ∈ E, then
ational complexity O(N R).
v ∈ I.
i

Proof. The schedule is implemented as a dictionary of lists
2. If vi ∈ B, then vj ∈ J. Reflexively, if vj ∈ B, then
of PGAs, one per internal resource in the network, called a
vi ∈ J.
resource schedule. Therefore, the only operation required
is to convert each PGA into its transmission format. This
3. If vi ∈ J ∧ vj 
∈ B, then vj ∈ I.
Reflexively, if
takes constant time for each PGA. There are O(N ) PGAs
vj ∈ J ∧ v i 
∈ B, then vi ∈ I.
in each resource schedule and O(R) resource schedules,
and so the overall complexity for compiling the schedule The set of allowed edges is
is O(N R).
E ∗ := {(vi , vj ) | (1. ∨ 2. ∨ 3.) ∧ vi , vj ∈ V}.
(89)
Theorem D.15. The program ComputeSchedule has
operational complexity
E.ii. The set of allowed entanglement generaO(N 3 R).

tion paths

(87)

Definition 24 (Allowed entanglement generation paths).
Let G = (V, E) be an internally connected network resource
graph with V = E ⊔ I ⊔ J ⊔ B and E ⊆ E ∗ . Let L be the
Proof. By Lemmas D.12, D.13 and D.14 the total com- set of local areas of G. Define
plexity is given by

X
X
πe,e′ = π = (e, v1 , · · · , vk , e′ ) ∈ Pvalid ,
(90)
2
O(Nϕ R) +
O(N Nϕ R) + O(N R)
ϕ∈Φ
ϕ∈Φ
the set of all valid entanglement generation paths be3
3
= O(N R) + O(N R) = O(N R).
(88) tween two specific end nodes e, e′ ∈ E, of variable length
k = |πe,e′ | − 2. The set Pallowed ⊂ Pvalid of allowed entanglement generation paths is a restriction of the set
48

Long-distance
Backbones

Local
Areas

End
Nodes

Time to Update
Filling Classes (s)

Time to Admit
PGTs (s)

Time to Compute
Schedule (s)
(without Compilation)

Total Time to Produce
Network Schedule (s)

1
2
2
2
2
3
5
6
7
12

2
2
2
3
3
3
4
3
5
4

15
15
50
30
50
30
40
35
50
40

0.00011
0.00011
0.00025
0.00017
0.00027
0.00018
0.00031
0.00022
0.00059
0.00034

0.00017
0.00019
0.00180
0.00051
0.00147
0.00061
0.00133
0.00121
0.00291
0.00182

0.00683
0.00707
0.03461
0.02276
0.04741
0.02406
0.06215
0.03738
0.13799
0.08051

0.05268
0.05246
0.09126
0.07343
0.10465
0.07529
0.11797
0.09196
0.20227
0.14175

Table 5: Average computation times for each process of the Network Scheduler control application, from the simulations
of randomly generated network topologies parametrized by Table 1. These values are based on the simulations with
default Arqon, where the bonus allocation phase of the Compute Schedule process is enabled.
of valid entanglement generation paths, as follows

Pallowed = πe,e′ ∀e, e′ ∈ E πe,e′ ∈ B ∗ (e, e′ ) ∧

∗
′ ∗
∀Ly ∈ L, πe,e′ ∈ Ly (e, e , b ) ,
(91)
where
k=|πe,e′ |−2
∗

1(vx ∈B) = b∗(e,e ) }, (92)
′

X

′

B (e, e ) = {πe,e′

x=1


L∗y (e, e′ ,b∗ ) = πe,e′ ∈ B ∗ (e, e′ )
k=|πe,e′ |−2

1(vx ∈Ly ) 1(vx ∈I) = ly∗ (e, e′ , b∗ ) , (93)

X
x=1

and
k=|πe,e′ |−2
∗

′

b (e, e ) = min
πe,e′

1(vx ∈B) ,

(94)

1(vx ∈Ly ) 1(vx ∈I) ,

(95)

X
x=1

k=|πe,e′ |−2

ly∗ (e, e′ , b∗ ) = min
πe,e′

X
x=1

and 1(A) is an indicator function that takes value 1 if A
is true and value 0 if A is false.
Allowed paths are restricted to those that minimize the
number of backbones traversed in the path between two
end nodes. Of those paths, they are also shortest paths
within each local area.
E.iii.

Proof of Lemma VI.1. Disjointness: By construction, if
a path is in ΠB it cannot be in any ΠJj nor any ΠIi , and
likewise paths in any ΠJj cannot be in any ΠIi . Therefore,
it suffices to show that any path can be in at most one ΠJj
or at most one ΠIi .
Suppose that there exists some π, i, i′ with i ̸= i′ such
that π ∈ ΠIi and π ∈ ΠIi′ . By definition of the set of
allowed edges E ∗ , (i, i′ ) ∈
/ E ∗ . Since E ⊆ E ∗ , (i, i′ ) ∈
/ E,
′
thus p = (u, ..., i, •, ..., i , ..., v) for some end nodes u, v ∈
E. The only allowed edges (i, •) are (i, w) for some w ∈ E,
or (i, j) for some j ∈ J. In the former case, this implies
p∈
/ Pvalid and hence also p ∈
/ Pallowed . In the latter case,
∃k s.t. j ∈ Jk =⇒ p ∈ ΠJk . In both cases, this contradicts
that p ∈ ΠIi . Therefore, no such p, i, i′ can exist.
Suppose instead that there exists p, j, j ′ with j ̸= j ′ such
that p ∈ ΠJj and p ∈ ΠJj′ . By the definitions of E ∗ and
Pallowed , the only paths from nodes in Jj to nodes in Jj ′ is
via some b ∈ B. Therefore, there exists some k such that
pk = b and thus p ∈ ΠB . This contradicts that p ∈ ΠJi
and so no such p, j, j ′ can exist
Completeness: We proceed by construction. Consider
some path p = (e, •, ...), for e ∈ E. By definition of E ∗ ,
and since E ⊆ E ∗ , the only possible edges (e, •) are of the
form (e, i) for some i ∈ I. Then, p = (e, i, •, · · · ), for some
i ∈ I. By definition of E ∗ , and since E ⊆ E ∗ , the only
allowed edges are of the form (i, e′ ) for some e′ ∈ E, or
(i, j) for some j ∈ J. In the former case, p ∈ Πi . In the
later case, since the Jk form a disjoint partition of J, ∃k
such that j ∈ Jk . Therefore, if p ∈
/ ΠB , then p ∈ ΠJk .
B
Otherwise, p ∈ Π . Therefore, all paths in Pallowed are in
some Π, and so Π forms a disjoint partition of Pallowed .

Specific Choice of Path Partition
E.iv.

Lemma VI.1.
Π = {ΠB } ∪ {Πj }j∈J ∪ {Πi }i∈I ,

Specific Choice of Filling Classes

Here we prove that the specific choice of filling classes used
(15) in our implementation is well-behaved.
Lemma E.1 (The Specific Choice of Filling Classes is
Well-Behaved). Let G be an internally connected network

where ΠB , ΠJj ∀j, and ΠIi ∀i are as in Definition 13, is a
disjoint partition of Pallowed .
49

in Pallowed that does not contain backbone vertices. However, since G is internally connected
(Definition 5), there exists a path πb ∈ Pallowed
that:

resource graph. The specific choice of filling classes Φ defined in (16) is a well-behaved set of filling classes.
Proof. Let L = {Li = (Vi , Ei )} be the set of local areas
of G. Let Ji = J ∩ Vi be the junction nodes in sub-graph
Li . We need to show that Φ satisfies both conditions of
Definition 15.

i. contains at least one backbone vertex (so
πb ∈ ΠB ),
ii. and traverses through resource r (since G is
internally connected and Pallowed does not
decrease the network connectivity, but only
restricts to a particular type of shortest path
between any two nodes).

1. Distinct Resource Sets:
Claim: ∀ϕ, ϕ′ ∈ Φ with ϕ ̸= ϕ′ , we have
ξ(Πϕ ) ̸= ξ(Πϕ′ ).
Proof: We consider all possible pairs of distinct filling classes:

Therefore, r ∈ ξ(ΠB ). Since r was arbitrary,
ξ(Πϕ′ ) ⊆ ξ(ΠB ). Moreover, the inclusion is
proper, as B ∩ ξ(Πb ) ̸= ∅ while B ∩ ξ(Πϕ′ ) = ∅
(from Condition 1). Hence, ξ(Πϕ′ ) ⊂ ξ(ΠB ).

(a) ϕ = ϕB and ϕ′ = ϕJj for some j ∈ J.
Since every path π ∈ ΠB contains at least one
backbone node b ∈ B, we have B ∩ ξ(ΠB ) ̸= ∅.
By definition, ΠJj ⊆ Pallowed \ ΠB , so paths
in ΠJj contain no backbone nodes. Therefore
B ∩ ξ(ΠJj ) = ∅. It follows that ξ(ΠB ) ̸= ξ(ΠJj ).

(b) ϕ = ϕJj and ϕ′ = ϕJj′ for j ̸= j ′ ∈ J.
In case 1. (c), we noted that, with the exclusion of end nodes, local areas have disjoint vertex sets. Since paths in ΠJj , respectively ΠJj′ , are
entirely contained in the local areas Lj , respectively Lj ′ , ξ(ΠJj ) ∩ ξ(ΠJj′ ) = ∅ and this case does
not satisfy the premise of condition 2.

(b) ϕ = ϕB and ϕ′ = ϕIi for some i ∈ I.
Similarly to case (a), ΠIi ⊆ Pallowed \ ΠB , so
B ∩ ξ(ΠIi ) = ∅.
But B ∩ ξ(ΠB ) ̸= ∅, so
B
I
ξ(Π ) ̸= ξ(Πi ).

(c) ϕ = ϕJj and ϕ′ = ϕIi for some j ∈ J and i ∈ I.
There are two sub-cases.
If i ∈
/ Vj , then
ξ(ΠJj ) ∩ ξ(ΠIi ) = ∅, since distinct local areas
have distinct vertex sets.
Hence this subcase does not satisfy the premise of condition
2. Alternatively, i ∈ Vj and ξ(ΠJj ) ∩ ξ(ΠIi ) ̸= ∅.
In this sub-case, consider arbitrary r ∈ ξ(ΠIi ).
Then ∃πi ∈ ΠIi such that r ∈ πi . By definition
of ΠIi and the set of local areas, all vertices in πi
are in Vj . By the internal connectivity of local
area Lj , there exists an allowed path πj ∈ Lj
that:

(c) ϕ = ϕJj and ϕ′ = ϕJj′ for j ̸= j ′ ∈ {1, · · · , |L|}.
Paths π ∈ ΠJj contain at least one junction node
from Jj and paths π ′ ∈ ΠJj′ contain at least one
junction node from Jj ′ . Since, with the exclusion
of end nodes, local areas have disjoint vertex sets
(by Definition 12 of local areas), Jj ∩ Jj ′ = ∅.
Therefore, ξ(ΠJj ) ̸= ξ(ΠJj′ ).
(d) ϕ = ϕJj and ϕ′ = ϕIi for some j ∈ J and i ∈ I.
By definition, paths in ΠIi contain no junction
nodes. Therefore, ξ(ΠIi ) ∩ Jj ′ = ∅, ∀j ′ . Paths
in ΠJj on the other hand contain at least one
junction node j ′ ∈ Jj , hence ξ(ΠJj ) ∩ Jj ̸= ∅.
Therefore, ξ(ΠJj ) ̸= ξ(ΠIi ).

i. Contains at least one junction j ′ ∈ Jj (so
πj ∈ ΠJj ),
ii. and traverses resource r.
Therefore, r ∈ ξ(ΠJj ). Since r was arbitrary,
ξ(ΠIi ) ⊆ ξ(ΠJj ). Moreover, the inclusion is
proper since, from 1. (d), Jj ∩ ξ(ΠJj ) ̸= ∅ while
Jj ∩ ξ(ΠIi ) = ∅. Hence, ξ(ΠIi ) ⊂ ξ(ΠJj ).

(e) ϕ = ϕIi and ϕ′ = ϕIi′ for i ̸= i′ ∈ I.
By definition, paths in ΠIi must contain the
entanglement generation interface i, similarly
paths in ΠIi′ must contain the entanglement generation interface i′ . Based on Definition 23 of allowed edges, E ∗ , each path in ΠIi (ΠIi′ ) can contain at most one entanglement generation interface. It follows that ξ(ΠIi ) ̸= ξ(ΠIi′ ), and moreover ξ(ΠIi ) ∩ ξ(ΠIi′ ) = ∅.
2. Intersection of Associated Resources:
Claim: ∀ϕ, ϕ′ ∈ Φ with ϕ ̸= ϕ′ , if ξ(Πϕ )∩ξ(Πϕ′ ) ̸= ∅,
then either ξ(Πϕ ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕ′ ) or ξ(Πϕ′ ) ⊂ ξ(Πϕ ).

(d) ϕ = ϕIi and ϕ′ = ϕIi′ for i ̸= i′ ∈ I.
In 1. (e) we showed that ξ(ΠIi ) ∩ ξ(ΠIi′ ) = ∅,
and thus this case does not satisfy the premise
of condition 2.

E.v.

Determining the PGA Execution Time

We need to determine the duration of time Ed s.t.

Proof: In consideration of the structure of the specific choice of path partition, we analyze each case
where sets of associated resources can intersect:

P [packet generated before time Ed ] ≥ ppacket .

(96)

For packets p with s = 1, this can be done with the ge(a) ϕ = ϕB and ϕ′ ∈ {ϕJj : j ∈ J, ϕIi : i ∈ I}.
ometric/exponential distribution, but for packets where
Consider arbitrary r ∈ ξ(Πϕ′ ). Then, ∃π ∈ Πϕ′ the number of requested pairs s > 1, the exact calculasuch that r ∈ π. By Definition 13, π is a path tion of (96) is not known. There are however results from
50

scan statistics which give very accurate estimations of this
probability for a known number of attempts to generate
entanglement m and probability of each attempt succeeding. Such results can be found in, e.g. [2, 72, 45, 44].
We translate between a number of attempts m of some
concrete duration and each with a probability of success
psucc and the rate of successful link generation Rπ on an
end-to-end path π for a total duration of time Ed . For
full details of our treatment of this problem, see [7], Appendix C. Every PGA from a demand d is ultimately assigned an execution time Ed that is long enough that each
PGA succeeds with probability ppacket .

51

F.
F.i.

Compute Network Schedule

F.i.a.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45

Code Listings

Minimal Allocation

def minimal_allocation_scheduler (
filling_class : FillingClass ,
n e t w o r k _ s c h e d u l e : NetworkSchedule ,
start_time : f l o a t
):
i f not f i l l i n g _ c l a s s :
return
n e t w o r k _ s c h e d u l e . add_tasks_minimal ( f i l l i n g _ c l a s s )
# l o g g e r = LogManager . g e t _ r e s o u r c e _ s c h e d u l e r _ l o g g e r ( )
cycle_start_time = start_time
p o n t e r s = { r : −100 f o r r i n n e t w o r k _ s c h e d u l e . s c h e d u l e . k e y s ( ) }
f o r i in range ( len ( f i l l i n g _ c l a s s ) ) :
cycle_time = f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . cycle_times [ i ]
k = 0
f o r k i n r a n g e ( f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . numbers_of_cycles [ i ] ) :
f o r j , t a s k i n enumerate ( f i l l i n g _ c l a s s [ i : ] ) :
o f f s e t = sum ( t . e x e c u t i o n _ t i m e f o r t i n f i l l i n g _ c l a s s [ i : i + j ] )
_ s t a r t _ t o _ s c h e d u l e = time . p r o c e s s _ t i m e ( )
network_schedule . schedule_packet_generation_attempt (
task , cycle_start_time + cycle_time ∗ k + o f f s e t ,
True ,
pga_id=sum ( f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . numbers_of_cycles [ : i ] ) + k ,
s c h e d u l e _ p o i n t e r s=p o n t e r s )
_ s t a r t _ t o _ s c h e d u l e = time . p r o c e s s _ t i m e ( )
network_schedule . schedule_packet_generation_attempt (
filling_class [ i ] ,
cycle_start_time + cycle_time ∗ (
f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . numbers_of_cycles [
i ] ) , True ,
pga_id=sum (
f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . numbers_of_cycles [
: i ]) + k,
s c h e d u l e _ p o i n t e r s=p o n t e r s )
c y c l e _ s t a r t _ t i m e += f i l l i n g _ c l a s s [ i ] . e x e c u t i o n _ t i m e + (
f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . numbers_of_cycles [ i ] ) ∗ c y c l e _ t i m e

Listing 1: Implementation of the minimal allocation phase of Compute Schedule, via the DirectAllocation
scheduler, Algorithm 6. Note that rather than returning an updated network schedule, this subroutine simply updates
the provided NetworkSchedule object.

F.i.b.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Bonus Round Robin

d e f bonus_phase_round_robin_scheduler (
filling_class : FillingClass ,
n e t w o r k _ s c h e d u l e : NetworkSchedule ,
):
# l o g g e r = LogManager . g e t _ r e s o u r c e _ s c h e d u l e r _ l o g g e r ( )
i f not f i l l i n g _ c l a s s :
return
_resources = [ r f o r r in network_schedule . s c h e d u l e . keys ( )
not r & 1 << get_component_id_size ( ) − 1 ]
schedule_pointers = { r : 0 f o r r in _resources }

52

if

15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89

release_times_to_consider = set ()
round_robin_index = 0
next_start_time = 0
n e t w o r k _ s c h e d u l e . add_tasks_bonus ( f i l l i n g _ c l a s s )
d e f _get_next_start_time ( ) −> f l o a t | None :
n o n l o c a l next_start_time
end_times = {
r : n e t w o r k _ s c h e d u l e . s c h e d u l e [ r ] [ s c h e d u l e _ p o i n t e r s [ r ] ] . end_time f o r r
in _resources i f
s c h e d u l e _ p o i n t e r s [ r ] < l e n ( network_schedule . s c h e d u l e [ r ] ) }
# l o g g e r . debug ( f ’ c o n s i d e r i n g end t i m e s : { end_times } ’ )
_next_end_time = min ( end_times . v a l u e s ( ) ) i f end_times . v a l u e s ( ) e l s e i n f
# l o g g e r . debug ( f " n e x t end time : {_next_end_time } " )
_minimising_resources = [
r f o r r i n end_times . k e y s ( ) i f
math . i s c l o s e ( end_times [ r ] ,
_next_end_time ) ] i f _next_end_time != i n f e l s e

[]

_index , _next_release_time = min (
enumerate ( r e l e a s e _ t i m e s _ t o _ c o n s i d e r ) ,
key=lambda t : t [ 1 ]
) i f release_times_to_consider e l s e (0 , i n f )
# l o g g e r . debug ( f " c o n s i d e r i n g r e l e a s e t i m e s : { r e l e a s e _ t i m e s _ t o _ c o n s i d e r } " )
# l o g g e r . debug ( f " n e x t r e l e a s e time : { _next_release_time } " )
i f _next_end_time == i n f and _next_release_time == i n f :
r e t u r n None
i f _next_end_time <= _next_release_time :
f o r r in _minimising_resources :
s c h e d u l e _ p o i n t e r s [ r ] += 2
i f _next_end_time i n r e l e a s e _ t i m e s _ t o _ c o n s i d e r :
r e l e a s e _ t i m e s _ t o _ c o n s i d e r . remove ( _next_end_time )
# l o g g e r . debug ( " A l s o removed end time from r e l e a s e _ t i m e s _ t o _ c o n s i d e r " )
r e t u r n _next_end_time
else :
r e l e a s e _ t i m e s _ t o _ c o n s i d e r . remove ( _next_release_time )
r e t u r n _next_release_time
d e f _ t a s k _ i n d i c e s _ t o _ i n s p e c t ( s t a r t : i n t ) −> G e n e r a t o r [ i n t , None , None ] :
f o r i in range ( len ( f i l l i n g _ c l a s s ) ) :
yield ( start + i ) % len ( f i l l i n g _ c l a s s )
d e f _ r e s o u r c e s _ a v a i l a b l e ( _tts : P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ) −> b o o l :
f o r r e s o u r c e i n _tts . path [ 1 : − 1 ] :
i f s c h e d u l e _ p o i n t e r s [ r e s o u r c e ] >= l e n (
network_schedule . s c h e d u l e [ r e s o u r c e ] ) :
continue
i f network_schedule . s c h e d u l e [ r e s o u r c e ] [ s c h e d u l e _ p o i n t e r s [
r e s o u r c e ] ] . start_time < next_start_time + candidate_task . execution_time :
return False
r e t u r n True
d e f _ f u t u r e _ m i n s e p _ v i o l a t i o n ( _tts : P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ) −> b o o l :
_ r e f e r e n c e _ r e s o u r c e = _tts . path [ 1 ]
_schedule_except = n e t w o r k _ s c h e d u l e . s c h e d u l e [ _ r e f e r e n c e _ r e s o u r c e ]
offset = 0
while (
schedule_pointers [ _reference_resource ] + o f f s e t < len (
_schedule_except )
and
_schedule_except [
schedule_pointers [ _reference_resource ] + o f f s e t

53

90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164

] . s t a r t _ t i m e < n e x t _ s t a r t _ t i m e + _tts . e x e c u t i o n _ t i m e + _tts . minsep
):
i f _schedule_except [
schedule_pointers [ _reference_resource ] + o f f s e t
] . t a s k _ i d == _tts . t a s k _ i d :
r e t u r n True
o f f s e t += 1
return False
d e f _ pa s t _ min s e p _v i o l at i o n ( _tts : P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ) −> Tuple [
b o o l , f l o a t | None ] :
_ r e f e r e n c e _ r e s o u r c e = _tts . path [ 1 ]
_schedule_excerpt = network_schedule . s c h e d u l e [ _reference_resource ]
o f f s e t = 1 i f schedule_pointers [ _reference_resource ] < len (
_schedule_excerpt ) e l s e 2
while (
s c h e d u l e _ p o i n t e r s [ _ r e f e r e n c e _ r e s o u r c e ] − o f f s e t >= 0
and (
_schedule_excerpt [
schedule_pointers [
_reference_resource
] − offset
] . end_time > n e x t _ s t a r t _ t i m e − _tts . minsep
and not
np . i s c l o s e (
_schedule_excerpt [
schedule_pointers [
_reference_resource
] − offset
] . end_time ,
n e x t _ s t a r t _ t i m e − _tts . minsep
)
)
):
i f _schedule_excerpt [
schedule_pointers [
_reference_resource
] − offset
] . t a s k _ i d == _tts . t a s k _ i d :
r e t u r n True , _ s c h e d u l e _ e x c e r p t [
schedule_pointers [
_reference_resource
] − offset
] . end_time + _tts . minsep
o f f s e t += 1
i f schedule_pointers [ _reference_resource ] − o f f s e t < 0:
break
r e t u r n F a l s e , None
if

a l l ( network_schedule . s c h e d u l e [ r ] [ 0 ] . start_time > 0 f o r r in
s c h e d u l e _ p o i n t e r s . keys ( ) i f network_schedule . s c h e d u l e [ r ] ) :
n e x t _ s t a r t _ t i m e = min ( n e t w o r k _ s c h e d u l e . s c h e d u l e [ r ] [ 0 ] . end_time f o r r i n
schedule_pointers . keys ( ) )

while next_start_time < network_schedule . l e n g t h :
c y c l e _ s t a r t _ t i m e = time . p r o c e s s _ t i m e ( )
f o r i n d e x i n _ t a s k _ i n d i c e s _ t o _ i n s p e c t ( round_robin_index ) :
candidate_task = f i l l i n g _ c l a s s [ index ]
# l o g g e r . debug ( f ’ c a n d i d a t e _ t a s k : { c a n d i d a t e _ t a s k } ’ )
if (
not _ r e s o u r c e s _ a v a i l a b l e ( c a n d i d a t e _ t a s k )
or _future_minsep_violation ( candidate_task )
or next_start_time > candidate_task . expiry_time
o r n e x t _ s t a r t _ t i m e + c a n d i d a t e _ t a s k . e x e c u t i o n _ t i m e >= n e t w o r k _ s c h e d u l e . l e n g t h
):
continue
p a s t _ m i n s e p _ v i o l a t i o n , r e l e a s e _ t i m e = _ p as t _ m i ns e p _ vi o l a t io n (
candidate_task )

54

165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195

i f past_minsep_violation :
i f release_time > next_start_time :
r e l e a s e _ t i m e s _ t o _ c o n s i d e r . add ( r e l e a s e _ t i m e )
continue
network_schedule . schedule_packet_generation_attempt (
candidate_task ,
next_start_time ,
False ,
s c h e d u l e _ p o i n t e r s=s c h e d u l e _ p o i n t e r s
)
round_robin_index = i n d e x + 1
old_start_time = 0 + next_start_time
n e x t _ s t a r t _ t i m e = _get_next_start_time ( )
i f n e x t _ s t a r t _ t i m e i s None :
return
a s s e r t old_start_time < next_start_time
# l o g g e r . debug ( f " Completed c y c l e i n time { time . p r o c e s s _ t i m e ( ) − c y c l e _ s t a r t _ t i m e : . 5 g } " )
i f n e x t _ s t a r t _ t i m e i s None :
break
# l o g g e r . debug ( f " n e x t s t a r t time i s { n e x t _ s t a r t _ t i m e } " )
pass

Listing 2: Implementation of Algorithm 7 (BonusRoundRobin) in Python. Note that rather than returning an
updated network schedule, this subroutine simply updates the provided NetworkSchedule object.

F.i.c.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

Complete Scheduler

def complete_schedule_scheduler (
filling_classes : SetOfFillingClasses ,
n e t w o r k _ s c h e d u l e : NetworkSchedule ,
) −> Tuple [ f l o a t , f l o a t ] :
l o g g e r = LogManager . g e t _ r e s o u r c e _ s c h e d u l e r _ l o g g e r ( )
_start_minimal = time . p r o c e s s _ t i m e ( )
l o g g e r . i n f o ( " Computing ␣ Minimal ␣ S c h e d u l e " )
for f i l l i n g _ c l a s s in f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s . a l l _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s :
l o g g e r . debug (
f " S t a r t i n g ␣ t o ␣ compute ␣ minimal ␣ s c h e d u l e ␣ f o r ␣ f i l l i n g ␣ c l a s s ␣ { f i l l i n g _ c l a s s } "
)
s t a r t _ t i m e = sum ( f c . minimum_service_time f o r f c i n
filling_classes . preceding_filling_classes [
filling_class ])
m i n i m a l _ a l l o c a t i o n _ s c h e d u l e r ( f i l l i n g _ c l a s s , network_schedule ,
start_time )
minimal_time = time . p r o c e s s _ t i m e ( ) − _start_minimal
l o g g e r . debug (
f " Completed ␣ minimal ␣ phase ␣ i n ␣ time ␣ { time . p r o c e s s _ t i m e ( ) ␣−␣ _start_minimal : . 5 g } "
)
_start_bonus = time . p r o c e s s _ t i m e ( )
l o g g e r . i n f o ( " Computing ␣ Bonus ␣ S c h e d u l e " )
for fc in f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s . a l l _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s :
l o g g e r . debug (
f " S t a r t i n g ␣ t o ␣ compute ␣ bonus ␣ s c h e d u l e ␣ f o r ␣ f i l l i n g ␣ c l a s s ␣ { f c } " )
bonus_phase_round_robin_scheduler ( f c , n e t w o r k _ s c h e d u l e )
bonus_time = time . p r o c e s s _ t i m e ( ) − _start_bonus
l o g g e r . debug (
f " Completed ␣ bonus ␣ phase ␣ i n ␣ time ␣ { time . p r o c e s s _ t i m e ( ) ␣−␣ _start_bonus : . 5 g } "

55

37
38
39

)
r e t u r n minimal_time , bonus_time

Listing 3: Implementation of Algorithm 3 in Python.

F.ii.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48

Admit New Tasks

d e f admit_new_tasks ( f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s : S e t O f F i l l i n g C l a s s e s , t a s k _ i n t a k e _ o b j e c t : D i c t [ i n t , L i s t [
P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ] ] , r e s o u r c e s : L i s t [ i n t ] ) −> D i c t [ i n t , i n t ] :
"""
␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ : param␣ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s : ␣ s e t ␣ o f ␣ f i l l i n g ␣ c l a s s e s
␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ : param␣ t a s k _ i n t a k e _ o b j e c t : ␣ t a s k ␣ i n t a k e ␣ o b j e c t ␣ i n ␣ f o r m a t ␣ {demand_id : [ PGT] }
␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ : param␣ r e s o u r c e s : ␣ l i s t ␣ o f ␣ r e s o u r c e s
␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ : r e t u r n : ␣ l i s t ␣ o f ␣ a c c e p t e d ␣ demands
␣␣␣␣"""
l o g g e r = LogManager . g e t _ a d m i s s i o n _ c o n t r o l _ l o g g e r ( )
available_time = { r : get_scheduling_interval_duration () for r in resources }
for f i l l i n g _ c l a s s in f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s . a l l _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s :
for resource in f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . associated_resources :
a v a i l a b l e _ t i m e [ r e s o u r c e ] −= f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . minimum_service_time
accepted_demands = {}
f o r demand i n t a s k _ i n t a k e _ o b j e c t :
l o g g e r . i n f o ( f " C o n s i d e r i n g ␣demand␣ {demand} " )
f o r pgt_to_admit i n t a s k _ i n t a k e _ o b j e c t [ demand ] :
l o g g e r . i n f o ( f " C o n s i d e r i n g ␣PGT␣ { pgt_to_admit } " )
try :
f i l l i n g _ c l a s s = f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s . g e t _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s ( pgt_to_admit )
except F i l l i n g C l a s s E r r o r :
l o g g e r . i n f o ( f " R e j e c t e d ␣PGT␣ { pgt_to_admit } ␣ b e c a u s e ␣ no ␣ f i l l i n g ␣ c l a s s ␣ was ␣ found " )
continue
for resource in f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . associated_resources :
a v a i l a b l e _ t i m e [ r e s o u r c e ] += f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . minimum_service_time
f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . add_packet_generation_task ( pgt_to_admit )
i f a l l ( a v a i l a b l e _ t i m e [ r e s o u r c e ] − f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . minimum_service_time > 0 f o r r e s o u r c e i n
f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . associated_resources ) :

accepted_demands [ demand ] = pgt_to_admit . t a s k _ i d
for resource in f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . associated_resources :
a v a i l a b l e _ t i m e [ r e s o u r c e ] −= f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . minimum_service_time
l o g g e r . debug ( f " Remaining ␣ a v a i l a b l e ␣ time : ␣ { a v a i l a b l e _ t i m e } " )
l o g g e r . i n f o ( f " a c c e p t e d ␣demand : ␣ {demand} ␣ with ␣PGT␣ { pgt_to_admit } " )
break
else :
l o g g e r . i n f o ( f " r e j e c t e d ␣PGT␣ f o r ␣ i n s u f f i c i e n t ␣ time . ␣Demand␣ID : ␣ {demand } , ␣PGT: ␣ {
pgt_to_admit } " )
f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . remove ( pgt_to_admit )
for resource in f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . associated_resources :
a v a i l a b l e _ t i m e [ r e s o u r c e ] −= f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . minimum_service_time
r e t u r n accepted_demands

Listing 4: Implementation of Algorithm 5 in Python.

F.iii.

Update Filling Classes

56

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

c l a s s CompletedDemands :
expired_demands : L i s t [ i n t ] = d a t a c l a s s e s . f i e l d ( d e f a u l t _ f a c t o r y= l i s t )
removed_demands : L i s t [ i n t ] = d a t a c l a s s e s . f i e l d ( d e f a u l t _ f a c t o r y= l i s t )
terminated_demands : L i s t [ i n t ] = d a t a c l a s s e s . f i e l d ( d e f a u l t _ f a c t o r y= l i s t )
@property
d e f all_removed_demands ( s e l f ) :
r e t u r n s e l f . removed_demands + s e l f . terminated_demands + s e l f . expired_demands
def update_filling_classes (
o l d _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s : S e t O f F i l l i n g C l a s s e s | None ,
p a t h _ p a r t i t i o n : L i s t [ S e t [ Tuple [ i n t , . . . ] ] ] | None ,
termination_buffer : Set [ i n t ] ,
expiration_cutoff_time : f l o a t
) −> Tuple [
SetOfFillingClasses ,
CompletedDemands ,
]:
completed_demands = CompletedDemands ( )
i f p a t h _ p a r t i t i o n i s not None :
new_filling_classes = SetOfFillingClasses ( path_partition )
f a i l e d _ t a s k s = n e w _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s . a d d _ p ac k e t _ g e n er a t i o n _ ta s k s ( o l d _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s . a l l _ t a s k s
if old_filling_classes else [ ] )
completed_demands . removed_demands = [ t . parent_demand_id f o r t i n f a i l e d _ t a s k s ]
else :
new_filling_classes = old_filling_classes
expired , terminated = n e w _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s . update_live_tasks ( termination_buffer ,
expiration_cutoff_time )
completed_demands . expired_demands = [ t a s k . parent_demand_id f o r t a s k i n e x p i r e d ]
completed_demands . terminated_demands = [ t a s k . parent_demand_id f o r t a s k i n t e r m i n a t e d ]
r e t u r n n e w _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s , completed_demands

Listing 5: Implementation of Algorithm 4 (UpdateFillingClasses)

57

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74

c l a s s F i l l i n g C l a s s ( L i s t [ PacketGenerationTask ] ) :
d e f __init__ ( s e l f , p a t h _ p a r t i t i o n : S e t [ Tuple [ i n t , . . . ] ] ) −> None :
s u p e r ( ) . __init__ ( )
s e l f . _ p a t h _ p a r t i t i o n : S e t [ Tuple [ i n t , . . . ] ] = p a t h _ p a r t i t i o n
s e l f . _ a s s o c i a t e d _ r e s o u r c e s : S e t [ i n t ] | None = None
s e l f . _numbers_of_cycles : L i s t [ i n t ] | None = None
s e l f . _cycle_times : L i s t [ f l o a t ] | None = None
s e l f . _minimum_service_time : f l o a t | None = None
d e f _ c a l c u l a t e _ a s s o c i a t e d _ r e s o u r c e s ( s e l f ) −> None :
s e l f . _associated_resources = set (
[ r f o r path i n s e l f . _ p a t h _ p a r t i t i o n f o r r i n path [ 1 : − 1 ] ] )
@property
def path_partition ( s e l f ) :
return s e l f . _path_partition
@property
def associated_resources ( s e l f ) :
i f s e l f . _ a s s o c i a t e d _ r e s o u r c e s i s None :
s e l f . _calculate_associated_resources ()
return s e l f . _associated_resources
@property
d e f a s s o c i a t e d _ n o d e s ( s e l f ) −> S e t [ i n t ] :
r e t u r n { r f o r path i n s e l f . _ p a t h _ p a r t i t i o n f o r r i n path }
def calculate_cycle_times ( s e l f ) :
# s e l f . s o r t ( key=lambda t a s k : t a s k . minimum_allocation )
s e l f . _cycle_times = [
max ( [ t . e x e c u t i o n _ t i m e + t . minsep f o r t i n s e l f [ i : ] ] + [
sum ( t . e x e c u t i o n _ t i m e f o r t i n s e l f [ i : ] ) ] ) f o r i i n
range ( len ( s e l f ) ) ]
pass
def calculate_numbers_of_cycles ( s e l f ) :
# s e l f . s o r t ( key=lambda t a s k : t a s k . minimum_allocation )
_ l i s t = [ t . minimum_allocation f o r t i n s e l f ]
f o r i i n r a n g e ( l e n ( s e l f ) − 1 , 0 , −1) :
_list [ i ] = _list [ i ] − _list [ i − 1]
_ l i s t [ 0 ] −= 1
s e l f . _numbers_of_cycles = _ l i s t
d e f calculate_minimum_service_time ( s e l f ) −> None :
s e l f . _minimum_service_time = sum ( x ∗ y f o r x , y i n
z i p ( s e l f . numbers_of_cycles ,
s e l f . c y c l e _ t i m e s ) ) + sum (
t . execution_time f o r t in s e l f )
d e f remove_expired_tasks ( s e l f , c u t o f f _ t i m e : f l o a t ) −> L i s t [
PacketGenerationTask ] :
expired_tasks = [ task f o r task in s e l f i f
t a s k . e x p i r y _ t i m e <= c u t o f f _ t i m e ]
s e l f [ : ] = [ t a s k f o r t a s k i n s e l f i f t a s k not i n e x p i r e d _ t a s k s ]
return expired_tasks
d e f remove_terminated_demands ( s e l f , terminated_demands : I t e r a b l e [ i n t ] ) −> \
L i s t [ PacketGenerationTask ] :
terminated_tasks = [ task f o r task in s e l f i f
t a s k . parent_demand_id i n terminated_demands ]
s e l f [ : ] = [ t a s k f o r t a s k i n s e l f i f t a s k not i n t e r m i n a t e d _ t a s k s ]
return terminated_tasks
def update_live_tasks (
self ,
terminated_demands : S e t [ i n t ] ,

58

75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149

current_time : f l o a t
) −> Tuple [
L i s t [ PacketGenerationTask ] ,
L i s t [ PacketGenerationTask ] ,
]:
e x p i r e d _ t a s k s = s e l f . remove_expired_tasks ( c u r r e n t _ t i m e )
t e r m i n a t e d _ t a s k s = s e l f . remove_terminated_demands ( terminated_demands )
if

self :
s e l f . calculate_numbers_of_cycles ( )
s e l f . calculate_cycle_times ()
s e l f . calculate_minimum_service_time ( )
else :
s e l f . _numbers_of_cycles = None
s e l f . _cycle_times = None
s e l f . _minimum_service_time = None
return expired_tasks , terminated_tasks
@property
d e f numbers_of_cycles ( s e l f ) :
i f s e l f . _numbers_of_cycles i s None o r l e n (
s e l f . _numbers_of_cycles ) != l e n ( s e l f ) :
s e l f . calculate_numbers_of_cycles ( )
r e t u r n s e l f . _numbers_of_cycles
@property
def cycle_times ( s e l f ) :
i f s e l f . _cycle_times i s None o r l e n ( s e l f . _cycle_times ) != l e n ( s e l f ) :
s e l f . calculate_cycle_times ()
r e t u r n s e l f . _cycle_times
@property
d e f minimum_service_time ( s e l f ) :
i f not s e l f :
return 0
if

s e l f . _minimum_service_time i s None :
s e l f . calculate_minimum_service_time ( )
r e t u r n s e l f . _minimum_service_time
d e f add_packet_generation_task ( s e l f , t a s k : P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ) :
i f not i s i n s t a n c e ( t a s k , P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ) :
r a i s e TypeError (
f ’ Task ␣ must ␣ be ␣ o f ␣ t y p e ␣ P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ␣ ( p r o v i d e d ␣ t y p e ␣ { t y p e ( t a s k ) } ) ’ )
_i = 0
w h i l e _i < l e n ( s e l f ) and s e l f [
_i ] . minimum_allocation < t a s k . minimum_allocation :
_i += 1
s e l f . i n s e r t ( _i , t a s k )
s e l f . _numbers_of_cycles = None
s e l f . _cycle_times = None
s e l f . _minimum_service_time = None
def clear ( s e l f ) :
super () . c l e a r ()
s e l f . _numbers_of_cycles = None
s e l f . _cycle_times = None
s e l f . _minimum_service_time = None
d e f append ( s e l f , t a s k : P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ) :
i f not i s i n s t a n c e ( t a s k , P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ) :
r a i s e TypeError (
f " Task ␣ must ␣ be ␣ o f ␣ t y p e ␣ P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ␣ ( p r o v i d e d ␣ t y p e ␣ { t y p e ( t a s k ) } ) " )
else :
s u p e r ( ) . append ( t a s k )
s e l f . _numbers_of_cycles = None
s e l f . _cycle_times = None
s e l f . _minimum_service_time = None
d e f remove ( s e l f , __value ) :
s u p e r ( ) . remove ( __value )

59

150
151
152

s e l f . _numbers_of_cycles = None
s e l f . _cycle_times = None
s e l f . _minimum_service_time = None

Listing 6: Implementation of a single filling classes ϕ. Any properties of a filling class (e.g. minimum_service_time)
which are None when called are calculated and stored. This means that subsequent calls to get the property only
require O(1) time rather than recomputing the value each time.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53

class SetOfFillingClasses :
d e f __init__ ( s e l f , p a t h _ p a r t i t i o n : L i s t [ S e t [ Tuple [ i n t ,

. . . ] ] ] ) −> None :

s e l f . _all_filling_classes : List [ FillingClass ] = [ FillingClass ( partition )
for partition in
path_partition ]
s e l f . _ a l l _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s . s o r t ( r e v e r s e=True )
s e l f . _ p r e c e d i n g _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s : Dict [
F i l l i n g C l a s s , Set [ F i l l i n g C l a s s ] ] = {
f c : { _fc f o r _fc i n s e l f . _ a l l _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s i f _fc > f c } i f f c . p a t h _ p a r t i t i o n e l s e s e t
() for fc in
self . _all_filling_classes }
s e l f . _ i n t e r f a c e _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s : L i s t [ F i l l i n g C l a s s ] | None = None
s e l f . _ l o c a l _ a r e a _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s : L i s t [ F i l l i n g C l a s s ] | None = None
s e l f . _ b a c k b o n e _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s : L i s t [ F i l l i n g C l a s s ] | None = None
d e f a d d_ p a c k e t _ ge n e r a t i on _ t a s k s ( s e l f , pgts_to_add : I t e r a b l e [
P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ] ) −> L i s t [ P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ] :
f a i l e d _ t a s k s : L i s t [ PacketGenerationTask ] = [ ]
f o r pgt i n pgts_to_add :
try :
s e l f . g e t _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s ( pgt ) . add_packet_generation_task ( pgt )
except F i l l i n g C l a s s E r r o r :
f a i l e d _ t a s k s . append ( pgt )
return failed_tasks
def update_live_tasks (
self ,
terminated_demands : S e t [ i n t ] ,
current_time : f l o a t
) −> Tuple [
L i s t [ PacketGenerationTask ] ,
L i s t [ PacketGenerationTask ] ,
]:
expired_tasks = [ ]
terminated_tasks = [ ]
for f i l l i n g _ c l a s s in s e l f . a l l _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s e s :
_ex , _term = f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . u p d a t e _ l i v e _ t a s k s ( terminated_demands ,
current_time )
e x p i r e d _ t a s k s . e x t e n d ( _ex )
t e r m i n a t e d _ t a s k s . e x t e n d ( _term )
return expired_tasks , terminated_tasks
d e f g e t _ f i l l i n g _ c l a s s ( s e l f , pgt : P a c k e t G e n e r a t i o n T a s k ) −> F i l l i n g C l a s s :
for f i l l i n g _ c l a s s in s e l f . _all_filling_classes :
i f pgt . path i n f i l l i n g _ c l a s s . p a t h _ p a r t i t i o n :
return f i l l i n g _ c l a s s
r a i s e F i l l i n g C l a s s E r r o r ( "No␣known␣ f i l l i n g ␣ c l a s s ␣ f o r ␣ pgt " )

Listing 7: Implementation of the set of filling classes Φ. Any properties of a filling class (e.g. minimum_service_time)
which are None when called are calculated and stored. This means that subsequent calls to get the property only
require O(1) time rather than recomputing the value each time.

F.iv.
1
2

Network Schedules

c l a s s PacketGenerationAttempt ( ArqonDataRecord ) :
src : int

60

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64

dst : int
start_time : f l o a t
end_time : f l o a t
task_id : i n t
demand_id : O p t i o n a l [ i n t ]
pga_id : O p t i o n a l [ i n t ]
is_minimal : b o o l
c l a s s R e s o u r c e S c h e d u l e ( L i s t [ PacketGenerationAttempt ] ) :
d e f __init__ ( s e l f , r e s o u r c e _ i d : i n t , s e q : t u p l e = ( ) ) :
s u p e r ( ) . __init__ ( s e q )
s e l f . _resource_id = resource_id
@property
def resource_id ( s e l f ) :
r e tu r n s e l f . _resource_id

d e f add_pga ( s e l f , __object : PacketGenerationAttempt , p o i n t e r : O p t i o n a l [ i n t ] = None ) :
"""
␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ re −w r i t t e n ␣ append ␣ method ␣ t o ␣ e n s u r e ␣ time−o r d e r i n g ␣ o f ␣PGAs .
␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ : param␣ __object : ␣ PacketGenerationAttempt ␣ t o ␣ add ␣ t o ␣ r e s o u r c e ␣ s c h e d u l e .
␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ : param␣ p o i n t e r : ␣ i n d e x ␣ o f ␣PGA␣ p r e c e d i n g ␣ r e q u e s t e d ␣ time
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣"""
i f not i s i n s t a n c e ( __object , PacketGenerationAttempt ) :
r a i s e TypeError ( f " Only ␣ t y p e ␣ PacketGenerationAttempt ␣ i s ␣ a l l o w e d . ␣ ( s u p p l i e d ␣ { t y p e ( __object
) }) " )
else :
i f not s e l f :
s u p e r ( ) . append ( __object )
return
if

p o i n t e r i s None :
p o i n t e r = _bs ( s e l f , __object . end_time )
if

pointer > 0:
s e l f . i n s e r t ( p o i n t e r + 1 , __object )
e l i f s e l f [ p o i n t e r ] . end_time < __object . end_time :
s e l f . i n s e r t ( 1 , __object )
else :
s e l f . i n s e r t ( 0 , __object )
else :
if

p o i n t e r == 0 :
s e l f . i n s e r t ( p o i n t e r , __object )
e l i f pointer > 0:
s e l f . i n s e r t ( p o i n t e r , __object )
e l i f pointer < 0:
s u p e r ( ) . append ( __object )

return {
" node " : s e l f . r e s o u r c e _ i d ,
" p a c k e t _ g e n e r a t i o n _ a t t e m p t s " : [ pga . t o _ d i c t ( ) f o r pga i n s e l f ]
}

c l a s s NetworkSchedule :
d e f __init__ ( s e l f , s t a r t _ t i m e : f l o a t , l e n g t h : f l o a t , r e s o u r c e s : L i s t [ i n t ] ,
None = None ) :

i d e n t i f i e r : int |

s e l f . _schedule : Dict [ int , ResourceSchedule ] = { r : ResourceSchedule ( r ) f o r r in r e s o u r c e s }

Listing 8: Implementation of the network schedule.

61

