A Dynamic-Kernel/QPacket Executable
for Quantum Repeater Chains in Q2NS/ns-3
Adam Pearson

adamgerrit.pearson@unina.it
University of Naples Federico II
Naples, Italy

Marcello Caleffi

marcello.caleffi@unina.it
University of Naples Federico II
Naples, Italy

arXiv:2608.24152v2 [quant-ph] 26 Aug 2026

Abstract
The Quantum Internet operates on entanglement, a non-local, noncopyable, stateful network resource, which motivates protocol organization beyond classical layering. We present a first executable specialization of the Dynamic Kernel/QPacket logic from the beyondlayering protocol suite, targeting entanglement distribution over
a linear quantum repeater chain. The implementation builds on
Q2NS, an ns-3-based quantum-network simulation module available
through the ns-3 App Store. It realizes QPacket meta-headers with
service intent and append-only action-commit stamps processed by
node-local Dynamic Kernels organized as a Planner–Executor–
Engine pipeline, while being deliberately scoped to an analytically verifiable service and policy. Within this scoped setting, we
study node heterogeneity through a link-preparation policy that accounts for pre-distributed entanglement and uneven entanglementgeneration support across nodes, including delegation via QPacket
forwarding. Simulations verify analytical link-resolvability models
and expose signaling load, forwarding behavior, and QPacket metaheader growth. Results show that QPacket overhead is shaped by
more than just encoding, including policy choices and available network resources. Overall, this study demonstrates how the Q2NS/ns3 substrate can support reproducible, policy-specific evaluation of
quantum-native protocol-suite concepts.

Keywords
Quantum Internet, Entanglement, Quantum Packet, Dynamic Kernel, ERC-CoG QNattyNet, Q2NS, ns-3

1

Introduction

The Quantum Internet [3–5, 8, 11, 16] is being designed to generate, distribute, maintain, and manipulate quantum entanglement
as its key communication resource. This fundamentally departs
from the classical Internet scope, where packets carry copyable
information that can be buffered, duplicated, and forwarded by
intermediate nodes. In quantum networks, entanglement is nonlocal and stateful: local operations at a node can affect entangled
states shared with remote nodes, and protocol decisions depend on
resource descriptors such as entanglement availability, ownership,
fidelity, and coherence time. As a result, quantum-network design
cannot be reduced to a direct adoption of classical Internet design
principles [4, 9].
A recently proposed response to this challenge is the beyondlayering protocol suite [3], where quantum network functions are
not organized into fixed vertical layers. Instead the suite dynamically composes atomic functionalities, called micro-protocols (MPs),
into higher-order constructs called meta-protocols (MePs) to realize
complex network functionalities. To support this composition, a

Angela Sara Cacciapuoti

angelasara.cacciapuoti@unina.it
University of Naples Federico II
Naples, Italy

quantum packet (QPacket) carries a quantum control field, termed
meta-header, which contains the selected service intent and an
append-only sequence of action-commit records, called stamps. At
each node, a local Dynamic Kernel reads the meta-header nondestructively, enabled by an appropriate quantum encoding [3];
it combines the packet-carried history with the node-local state;
constructs a Plan of Actions (PoA), maps actions to MPs and MePs;
and appends new stamps only at action-commit boundaries. In this
way, service progression is certified by the packet-carried history
rather than prescribed by a static layer order [3].
However, instantiating this suite as an ns-3 executable is nontrivial. The beyond-layering suite intentionally separates the reusable
architectural substrate from service-specific choices, including policies, MP libraries, routing assumptions, resource-management rules,
and QPacket choices. This calls for scoped executable specializations in which these choices are made explicit, instrumented, and
verified against analytical reference models.
This paper develops such a first executable specialization using Q2NS, an ns-3-based quantum-network simulator [13] available through the ns-3 App Store [14]. Q2NS extends ns-3 with
quantum-networking primitives while preserving the ability to cosimulate quantum operations and classical communication inside
the ns-3 event-driven environment. We build on the released Q2NS
substrate, without modifying its internals, and implement an executable Dynamic Kernel/QPacket specialization for end-to-end
(e2e) entanglement distribution over a linear quantum repeater
chain.
The implementation separates reusable beyond-layering structures from service-specific policy logic: the abstract QPacket metaheader, append-only commit stamps, and the Planner–Executor–
Engine Kernel pipeline follow the beyond-layering design [3], while
fixed-chain path selection, capability-dependent MP binding, and
failure handling are deliberately specialized to this service and
linear-chain topology, as summarized in Table 1. The service progresses by preparing adjacent entangled links, applying entanglement swapping at intermediate repeaters, and forwarding the
QPacket along the chain until delivery or failure. Link preparation
can be resolved in three ways: (i) a node can generate the required
elementary entanglement locally, (ii) it can delegate generation to
a neighboring node, or (iii) the required adjacent entanglement
is already available as a pre-distributed resource. If none of these
conditions holds, an entanglement link cannot be established under
this policy and the service fulfillment fails, as detailed in Sec. 2.3.
The contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:
• We implement an executable Dynamic Kernel and QPacket
specialization in Q2NS/ns-3 for e2e-entanglement distribution over a linear quantum repeater chain, instantiating

Adam Pearson, Marcello Caleffi, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti

Table 1: Scope of the executable e2e-entanglementdistribution specialization of the beyond-layering DynamicKernel.
Concept

Implementation

Service intent

e2e entanglement distribution over a
quantum repeater chain

QPacket meta-header

Service intent plus stamps

Dynamic Kernel

Planner–Executor–Engine pipeline

Service-specific policy

Capability-dependent binding to the
node-local MP library

Path selection

Alice–Bob chain with next-neighbor
forwarding only

Physical model

Noiseless operations; configurable
propagation delay; QPacket forwarding with per-qubit emission interval

entanglement resources, which applications later consume, for example through teleportation with classical correction signaling [1].
In a repeater chain, adjacent EPR links are extended by entanglement swapping: a repeater performs a Bell-state measurement
(BSM) on its two local halves, sends the classical outcome onward,
and thereby consumes the adjacent links to establish a longer-range
entanglement relation [2, 6].
This section details how the scoped specialization is realized
in Q2NS. We first describe the Q2NS simulation substrate and the
abstract QPacket meta-header model, then specify the DynamicKernel workflow and the service-specific policies used for repeaterchain entanglement distribution. This organization exposes a reusable
beyond-layering core – the QPacket meta-header, append-only
stamps, and Planner-Executor-Engine pipeline – and instantiates
path selection, capability-aware link-preparation policy for heterogeneous MP libraries, and failure handling as modular policy
choices for repeater-chain EPR distribution.

2.1

Simulation Substrate

We implement the above on top of Q2NS [13], an ns-3-based quantumnetwork simulator available on the ns-3 App Store [14]. Q2NS exQPacket meta-headers, append-only commit stamps, and a
tends ns-3 with quantum networking primitives, while preservPlanner–Executor–Engine pipeline.
ing ns-3’s event-driven execution model and classical network
• We design and implement a capability-aware link-preparation
stack. In particular, Q2NS introduces the QNode class derived from
policy for heterogeneous MP libraries, supporting local enns3::Node which can engage with all the classical networking simtanglement generation, delegation via QPacket forwarding,
ulations expected in ns-3, while also allowing transmission and
pre-distributed entanglement resources, and explicit failure
reception of qubits and node-local quantum processing such as comoutcomes.
• We verify the implementation against analytical link-resolvability putations and measurements. There are similarly derived classes
such as QChannel and QNetDevice. However, quantum networkmodels for deterministic and random generator placement.
ing simulations require management of quantum states and their
• We instrument the simulation to measure committed acpotentially non-local nature, such as with entanglement. To address
tions, signaling load, QPacket forwarding behavior, runtime
entanglement transmissions, and QPacket meta-header growth this, Q2NS introduces the NetController, which acts as a logically
centralized controller and registry for quantum states and quantum
under different capability and resource regimes.
networking objects such as Qubits, QNodes, and QChannels.
• We provide a reproducibility artifact built on Q2NS, includFor more details on the architecture and performance of Q2NS,
ing execution scripts, raw CSV outputs, and plotting scripts
please
refer to [13] and the Q2NS repository [15]. In this work,
for regenerating the main figures.
we build entirely on the released Q2NS functionalities, without
modifying its simulation core. The Dynamic-Kernel/QPacket logic
2 Dynamic Kernel Realization in Q2NS
is implemented as an additional specialization layer on top of the
The executable specialization considers a linear repeater chain,
Q2NS substrate, through new C++ data structures, service-policy
Alice − 𝑅1 − 𝑅2 − · · · − Bob. In this scoped setting, link-level EPRlogic, and instrumentation specific to the executable specialization
pair generation between adjacent nodes, entanglement swapping,
studied here.
QPacket forwarding, and service termination are all exercised. Although general topologies require routing, any selected route in2.2 Dynamic Kernel and QPackets
duces a repeater chain: once the participating repeaters have been
chosen, the local swapping structure is the same.
The beyond-layering suite is centered on two abstractions: the
This focus is motivated by the operational difference between
QPacket and the Dynamic Kernel [3]. QPackets carry a payload
classical and quantum networks: classical multi-hop forwarding
of entangled qubits and a quantum control field, the meta-header,
cannot be directly applied in the quantum domain. In fact, an uncarrying the service intent and committed-action history. Upon
known quantum state cannot be copied due to the no-cloning theoreceiving an incoming QPacket, the node runs its Dynamic Kernel,
rem [19]. Moreover, by the quantum measurement postulate, quanwhich advances the service intent by using the node internal state
tum states cannot in general be measured without disturbing them.
and the in-band meta-header carried by the QPacket. The Kernel
Storage and transmission further expose qubits to decoherence
acts as the node-local orchestration and execution environment:
effects [7, 9]. Consequently, the classical strategy of receiving, copyit plans candidate actions, composes the corresponding MPs into
ing, amplifying, and retransmitting information at each hop does
MePs, invokes the resulting realizations, and records completed acnot directly apply to quantum networks. Long-distance quantum
tion outcomes as append-only stamps at action-commit boundaries,
communication is therefore organized around the distribution of
as illustrated in Fig. 1.

A Dynamic-Kernel/QPacket Executable

Dynamic kernel at current node

Incoming
QPacket

PoA Planner

PoA Executor

PoA Engine

constructs

binds DAG to
local MPs

runs each MeP
may append stamp

local PoA
DAG

MeP
schedule

Updated
QPacket

Node Internal State
FTQ / FTC

MP
library

Optional
Hints

Drop, Deliver, or
Forward to the next hop

Communication
Infrastructure

Figure 1: Dynamic-Kernel pipeline triggered by an incoming QPacket. The Planner constructs a local PoA from the QPacket
meta-header and node-local state. The Executor schedules feasible actions and binds them to MPs/MePs. The Engine runs these
MPs/MePs and appends stamps only at action-commit boundaries before forwarding, delivering, or dropping the QPacket.
(1) PoA Planner: The Planner constructs a local and speculative
Plan of Actions (PoA) from the service intent, the accumulated stamps, and the node internal state. The internal
state includes FTC and FTQ, respectively capturing classical reachability and the node entanglement inventory.
Optional control-plane hints may refine the local planning
policy. The PoA is represented as a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) of candidate actions and dependency constraints.
(2) PoA Executor: The Executor binds candidate actions to concrete MP/MeP realizations. An MP implements an atomic
network functionality, while an MeP is a higher-order construct obtained by dynamically composing MPs to realize a
more complex functionality. Using the node’s MP library,
local dependencies, and node capability constraints, the Executor selects feasible actions and produces a dependencyrespecting runnable schedule.
(3) PoA Engine: The Engine executes the scheduled MP/MeP
realizations and certifies service progress only at actioncommit boundaries via stamps. Each committed action appends the corresponding stamp to the QPacket meta-header.
Local execution terminates by forwarding the packet to the
next hop, delivering the service, or dropping the packet. After a forward, the next node runs its own Dynamic Kernel.
The QPacket is realized as a C++ struct containing the service
intent and accumulated stamps. Thus, the QPacket meta-header is
modeled at a logical level, rather than as a concrete quantum-state
encoding. To model QPacket forwarding, we assign the QPacket a
logical qubit-equivalent size, denoted as 𝑛 qpacket . At each forwarding event, 𝑛 qpacket is computed by equating the number of qubits
with the number of classical bits needed to represent the current
variables of the QPacket structure. Thereby the model charges one
qubit-equivalent transmission per represented bit. By assuming
serial emission over the quantum channel with qubit emission interval of 𝑡 emit and a propagation delay of 𝑡 delay 1 , the total QPacket
forwarding time is 𝑡 delay + (𝑛 qpacket − 1)𝑡 emit . We chose 𝑡 delay = 0.5
ms, corresponding to a long, but experimentally demonstrated [18]

100 km of fiber, with a 5 µs/km propagation delay. We also chose
𝑡 emit = 1 ns, corresponding to an effective 1 GHz photon-emission
rate, consistent with high-rate single-photon sources [10, 17]. These
are used as representative timing parameters, however the focus
of this study is on scaling trends that are largely independent of
these choices. Overall, this model serves as a logical baseline and
not as a physical QPacket encoding proposal. Concrete implementations may introduce additional overheads from physical encoding
choices, synchronization, hardware constraints, or error correction. Thus, the measured forwarding delays quantify meta-header
growth trends under the abstract model, not absolute physical transmission costs. Classical messages are sent as UDP/IPv4 packets
under 30 bytes over ns-3 point-to-point links also with propagation
delay 𝑡 delay = 0.5 ms and a 1 Gbps data rate.
Dynamic-Kernel processing and individual MP execution are
instantaneous in simulation time. This isolates QPacket forwarding and meta-header growth effects. Future work will incorporate
realistic processing times, particularly important in noisy scenarios
where the quality of distributed entanglement decreases over time.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the Dynamic-Kernel workflow for the
executable repeater-chain specialization. Each repeater prepares
missing adjacent links, swaps between its left and right neighbors,
and forwards the updated QPacket. Table 2 details the mapping from
actions to MPs, simulated exchanges, and state/QPacket updates.
We record Dynamic-Kernel metrics through custom counters
maintained by a DynamicKernelManager object and by per-node
runtime state. These metrics include committed actions, delegatedgeneration requests, signaling messages, QPacket forwarding events,
failure depth, and QPacket meta-header growth. They are implemented as custom counters, rather than ns-3 TraceSources, because
they are internal to the service-specific Dynamic-Kernel logic instantiated in this work. A future Q2NS module could expose the
stable subset of these events as ns-3 TraceSources.

2.3

Node Capabilities and Delegation Policy

Realistic quantum networks are expected to contain nodes with
heterogeneous capabilities. In the beyond-layering suite [3], this

1 Single-qubit transmissions, used in MP
GEN , propagate on Q2NS QChannels with

propagation delay 𝑡 delay .

1

Adam Pearson, Marcello Caleffi, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti

Table 2: Executor bindings and Engine behavior for each action in the executable repeater chain specialization
Planner Action

Executor MeP

Engine Implementation

LINK_PREP (𝑥 )

MPSYN

1. Send link-preparation packet for generation from this node to 𝑥
2. Receive acknowledgment from 𝑥

MPGEN

1. Generate EPR pair
2. Send half of EPR pair to 𝑥
3. Apply LINK_PREP state effect: add 𝑥 to this node’s FTQ and this node to 𝑥 ’s FTQ

Note: If node lacks MPGEN , then non-bindable. The Engine appends a failure stamp for LINK_PREP (𝑥 ) and installs a runtime soft hold waiting for reciprocal link preparation.
SWAP (𝑥, 𝑦)

MPQP

1. Wait until the runtime guard is satisfied: both adjacent FTQ entries are available.
2. BSM on two locally stored ebit halves (one from 𝑥 and one from 𝑦 )
3. Remove 𝑥 and 𝑦 from FTQ
4. Aggregate BSM outcome with classical correction packet received by 𝑥

MPSIG

Send aggregated classical correction packet to 𝑦 , triggering 𝑦 to change FTQ entry from this node to 𝑥

MPQP

Apply corrections when aggregated correction packet arrives

MPSIG

Send CompletionAck packet to 𝑥 , releasing ACT_HOLD(CompletionAck) at 𝑥 and applying the corresponding update of
FTQ𝑥

ACT_FORWARD (𝑥 )

MPFW

Forward QPacket to 𝑥 , triggering Dynamic Kernel pipeline at 𝑥

ACT_HOLD(trigger; mode)

None

Install service-level soft state, released by trigger. A stamp is only appended if mode is certifying. No MP invoked

ACT_DELIVER

None

Service terminates successfully, no further QPacket forwarding

ACT_DROP

None

Drop QPacket. Service terminates in failure

CORRECT_AND_ACK (𝑥 )

heterogeneity is naturally represented through node-local MP libraries: each node can bind and invoke only the MPs exposed by
its own library. In the present repeater-chain specialization, we
instantiate this heterogeneity through entanglement-generation
capability. Some nodes expose MPGEN , while others do not. In the
latter case, a LINK_PREP action cannot be bound locally.
This setting stresses an important feature of the beyond-layering
suite: the absence of a local MP does not by itself invalidate the
service progression. Indeed, the Dynamic Kernel pipeline naturally
adapts to missing local capabilities while preserving local autonomy and the single-writer discipline of the QPacket meta-header. If
the current QPacket holder cannot generate entanglement locally,
the Executor marks LINK_PREP as non-bindable. The Engine then
invokes no MP and records the failed local realization by appending
a failure stamp for LINK_PREP. The QPacket is then forwarded
according to the local PoA. The receiving node runs its own Dynamic Kernel, reads the updated stamp history, and may schedule
the reciprocal LINK_PREP using its own local MP library. For a
requested adjacent link between the current QPacket holder 𝑥 and
its neighbor 𝑦, the implemented policy is as follows:
(1) If 𝑥’s FTQ already contains an entanglement resource for
𝑦, no LINK_PREP action is added to the PoA.
(2) Otherwise, the Planner adds LINK_PREP(𝑦) to the local
PoA.
• If 𝑥 exposes MPGEN , the Executor binds LINK_PREP(𝑦)
according to Table 2. The resulting MeP synchronizes
the endpoints and generates an EPR pair at 𝑥, which
sends one half to 𝑦. Upon completion, the Engine applies the corresponding FTQ updates and appends a
committed LINK_PREP stamp to the QPacket metaheader.
• If 𝑥 lacks MPGEN , the Executor marks LINK_PREP as
non-bindable, by scheduling it with an empty MeP.

This signals to the Engine to invoke no MP and append a failure stamp. The QPacket is then forwarded
to 𝑦 when ACT_FORWARD(𝑦) is present in the local
PoA. Subsequently, the Engine at 𝑥 installs a local runtime soft hold waiting for reciprocal link preparation.
This hold is a local state under a release-only mode,
meaning it does not append a stamp.
• When 𝑦 receives the forwarded QPacket, it runs a new
Dynamic-Kernel pipeline. From the failure stamp, the
Planner knows to add the reciprocal LINK_PREP(𝑥),
with delegation forbidden. If 𝑦 also lacks MPGEN , the
service terminates with ACT_DROP. If 𝑦 exposes MPGEN ,
it realizes the link locally and sends one EPR-pair half
to 𝑥, releasing 𝑥’s runtime soft hold. After LINK_PREP,
𝑦 installs a local service soft hold waiting for signaling
from 𝑥 that it has completed its SWAP and, according
to the certifying mode, stamps this locally at 𝑦 since 𝑥
no longer has the QPacket.
(3) If the current QPacket holder cannot progress as no feasible
local continuation remains, the service terminates in failure
with ACT_DROP.
Our implementation is aligned with the invariants of the beyondlayering suite. Beyond the aforementioned local autonomy and
single-writer discipline, it also preserves in-band coordination, because the service context is transferred through the QPacket metaheader and its append-only stamp history, rather than through
global synchronization or an out-of-band speculative plan. And, it
preserves dynamic composition, since each receiving node recomputes its continuation locally from the stamp history and composes
its available MPs into an appropriate MeP.
This specialization also distinguishes two architectural classes
of local soft state, which differ in origin and semantics. The first
class consists of explicit service-level soft actions, represented by
ACT_HOLD. These actions are inserted by the Planner when the

A Dynamic-Kernel/QPacket Executable

Algorithm 1 Dynamic Kernel workflow for the executable repeaterchain specialization
1: Configure network, MP libraries, and pre-distribute entanglement
2: Inject QPacket at Alice with intent EPR_DISTRIBUTE(Alice, Bob)
3:
4: ReceivePacket(QPacket) {Trigger Dynamic Kernel}
5: PoA ← Planner(QPacket, FTQ, FTC)
6: ExecPlan ← Executor(PoA, MPs)
7: QPacketupdated ← Engine(ExecPlan, MPs, QPacket)
8:
9: Planner(QPacket, FTQ, FTC) {Build PoA}
10: 𝐴 ← first participant in QPacket intent; 𝐵 ← last participant
11: left ← left neighbor; right ← right neighbor
12: if LINK_PREP(left) failed in QPacket.stamps then
13:
Add LINK_PREP(left) with delegation forbidden
14:
Add ACT_HOLD( SWAP(prev(left), this node); certifying)
15: if this node = 𝐵 then
16:
Add CORRECT_AND_ACK(𝐴)
17:
Add ACT_DELIVER
18: else if this node = 𝐴 then
19:
if right ∉ FTQ then
20:
Add LINK_PREP(right)
21:
Add ACT_FORWARD(right)
22:
Add ACT_HOLD(CompletionAck; release-only)
23: else
24:
if right ∉ FTQ then
25:
Add LINK_PREP(right)
26:
Add SWAP(left, right)
27:
Add ACT_FORWARD(right)
28: Add action-level dependencies
29: return PoA
30:
31: Executor(PoA, MPs) {Build ExecPlan}
32: canGen ← (MPGEN ∈ MPs)
33: if not canGen ∧ (LINK_PREP with delegation forbidden) then
34:
return [ ]
35: for each action in PoA do
36:
if action is ACT_HOLD then
37:
Add as service-soft-action {Soft state}
38:
else if action is LINK_PREP(𝑣) and not canGen then
39:
Add as non-bindable {Engine records a failure stamp}
40:
Attach runtime-soft-hold until 𝑣 ∈ FTQ
41:
else
42:
Bind action according to Table 2
43:
Add bound action to ExecPlan
44: return ExecPlan
45:
46: Engine(ExecPlan, MPs, QPacket) {Run ExecPlan}
47: if ExecPlan = [ ] then
48:
Commit ACT_DROP and terminate the request
49: for each scheduled item in ExecPlan do
50:
if item is service-soft-action then
51:
Install local service-level soft state
52:
if mode is certifying then
53:
Append stamp after release
54:
else if item is non-bindable then
55:
Append failure stamp for the action {No MP is invoked}
56:
else if item has an unsatisfied runtime-soft-hold then
57:
Install local runtime-level soft state {No stamp}
58:
else
59:
Execute the bound MPs according to Table 2
60:
Apply local state-transition effects
61:
Append stamp after the action reaches its commit boundary
62: return QPacket

Table 3: Generator-capability placements used in the case
study. 𝐺𝑖 is whether node 𝑖 has MPGEN , indexed 0, . . . , 𝑁 − 1,
and 𝑛 gen-unres counts links where both endpoints lack MPGEN .
Placement

𝐺𝑖

𝑛 gen-unres

all
every2
every3
every4
middleOnly
finalBottleneck
random

1 ∀𝑖
𝑖 ≡ 0 (mod 2)
𝑖 ≡ 0 (mod 3)
𝑖 ≡ 0 (mod 4)
𝑖 = ⌊𝑁 /2⌋
𝑖 +2 < 𝑁
Bernoulli(𝑔)

0
0
⌊ 𝑁3 ⌋
2⌊ 𝑁 4−1 ⌋ +max(0, ( (𝑁 − 1) mod 4) − 1)
max(0, 𝑁 − 3)
1
Random variable 𝑛 gen-unres (𝐺 )

waiting condition is part of the service semantics derived from the
QPacket meta-header. This information must be encoded in the
PoA, since the Executor receives the PoA and the local MP library
but does not directly inspect the QPacket meta-header. We type
ACT_HOLD according to its release behavior. A release-only hold
is released by its trigger and does not append a stamp. This is the
case, for example, of ACT_HOLD(CompletionAck; release-only),
which lets the service initiator wait for the end-to-end completion acknowledgment. A certifying hold is also installed as local
soft state, but its trigger carries evidence that another node has
completed an action whose stamp must be written by the current holder of the authoritative QPacket meta-header. After validating the trigger and the associated consistency conditions, the
Engine releases the hold and appends the corresponding stamp.
Thus, ACT_HOLD(SwapReport; certifying) can be used when a
neighboring node performs a local SWAP after the QPacket has
already been forwarded, while the current QPacket holder remains
responsible for appending the SWAP stamp.
The second class consists of runtime soft holds. These are not
Planner actions. They are introduced by the Executor when a scheduled realization cannot proceed until an execution-time condition
becomes true, such as reciprocal link preparation after a failed local
LINK_PREP, or FTQ availability before SWAP. Thus, ACT_HOLD
communicates a service-level waiting requirement from the Planner to the Executor, whereas runtime soft holds are local execution
guards attached to scheduled items. Runtime soft holds are always
local non-stamping state.
Soft-state release is trigger-based. In the simulator, incoming
events are typed so that QPacket arrivals are distinguished from
soft-state triggers and side information. Only a QPacket starts a
new Dynamic-Kernel pipeline. By contrast, a soft-state trigger is a
classical or quantum event, such as a CompletionAck, a reciprocal
link-preparation event, a received EPR-pair half, or a correction
packet. Such a trigger is delivered through the signaling path and
matched against locally installed soft states. It does not start a new
authoritative Kernel pipeline. A trigger notifies the Engine that
a local runtime condition may have changed. The Engine then
applies the local state-transition effect according to the action/MeP
semantics and re-evaluates the guard associated with the hold.
Under this policy, a physical link is resolvable when it is already
present in FTQ or when at least one endpoint exposes MPGEN . This
gives a link-resolvability condition that admits a simple analytical
success probability characterization, which we compare directly

Adam Pearson, Marcello Caleffi, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti

Random placement at p = 0 for N = 10, 100, 1000
1.0

N = 10 theory

Deterministic placements and pre-distributed entanglement, N = 10
1.0

N = 10 sim
N = 100 sim
N = 1000 sim

N = 100 theory
N = 1000 theory

every-2 (ngap = 0)

0.8

Success probability

Success probability

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

final-bottleneck (ngap = 1)
every-3 (ngap = 3)
every-4 (ngap = 4)

0.6

middle-only (ngap = 7)

0.4

0.2

0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.0

1.0

0.0

Generator placement probability g

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Pre-distributed entanglement probability p

Figure 2: Success probability of random generator placement
with probability 𝑔 without pre-distributed entanglement.
Markers show Q2NS simulation results with 95% binomial
confidence intervals; dashed curves show the analytical probability that no two adjacent nodes both lack MPGEN .

Figure 3: Success probability for deterministic generatorcapability placements as a function of the pre-distributed
entanglement probability 𝑝 for 𝑁 = 10. Markers show Q2NS
simulation results with 95% binomial confidence intervals,
while dashed curves show the analytical probability 𝑝 𝑛gen-unres .

with simulation outcomes in Sec. 3 for several generator-capability
configurations.
Let 𝐺𝑖 = 1 indicate that node 𝑖 ∈ {0, . . . , 𝑁 − 1} has MPGEN
and 𝑛 gen-unres (𝐺) be the number of generator-unresolvable physical links, i.e. those such that 𝐺𝑖 = 0 ∧ 𝐺𝑖+1 = 0. These are the
physical links that cannot be prepared by either endpoint during
service fulfillment. For deterministic capability placements, 𝐺 and
𝑛 gen-unres (𝐺) are fixed by the placement. For random capability
placement, each 𝐺𝑖 is independently sampled with Pr(𝐺𝑖 = 1) = 𝑔.
The specific placements we investigate in this work and their
𝑛 gen-unres (𝐺) values are presented in Table 3.
When there is no pre-distributed entanglement, i.e., 𝑝 = 0, the
service is only successful if 𝑛 gen-unres (𝐺) = 0. For random capability
placement, this is the probability that no two non-generator nodes
are adjacent

⌊ (𝑁∑︁
+1)/2⌋ 
𝑁 −𝑘 +1
𝑃succ (𝑁 , 𝑔, 0) =
(1 − 𝑔)𝑘 𝑔𝑁 −𝑘 .
𝑘

of pre-distributed entanglement. Simulations were run on a MacBook with an Apple M5 chip and 16 GB Unified Memory. The results
presented here verify the specialized Dynamic-Kernel/QPacket implementation, illustrate the types of analyses supported by Q2NS/ns3, and identify key directions for future modularization and extensions. All data is available in this work’s artifact [12].
The main observations of these simulations are:
(1) The executable outcomes match the analytical success probabilities predicted by the link-resolvability model for the
considered capability placements and pre-distributed entanglement levels.
(2) Under the implemented policy and linear-chain topology,
success appears more sensitive to generator probability 𝑔
than to pre-distributed entanglement probability 𝑝.
(3) Append-only QPacket stamps induce linear terminal metaheader growth with chain length, while repeated forwarding of the growing meta-header produces a quadratic accumulated forwarding delay.

𝑘=0

If each link is independently pre-distributed an entangled pair
with probability 𝑝 > 0, then success relies on all 𝑛 gen-unres (𝐺)
generator-unresolvable links being pre-distributed, resulting in
𝑃succ (𝐺, 𝑝) = 𝑝 𝑛gen-unres (𝐺 ) .
For random capability placement, the success probability averages the fixed-placement expression over generator placements.

3

Results

This section evaluates the executable specialization along three axes.
First, we verify the behavior of the implementation by comparing
simulated outcomes with the analytic link-resolvability models developed in Sec. 2.3. Second, we examine how signaling load and
success vary across capability placements and pre-distributed entanglement. Third, we quantify QPacket meta-header growth and
the accumulated QPacket forwarding delay.
Data was collected for a range of network sizes, configurations of
node capabilities that stress particular failure modes, and amounts

3.1

Heterogeneous Node Capability Operation
without Pre-distributed Entanglement

We consider heterogeneous node capabilities, modeled by nodedependent MP libraries, in the worst-case autonomous regime.
Specifically, we set the pre-distributed entanglement probability to
𝑝 = 0, so that no adjacent entanglement resource is available before
the request, and we do not use control-plane hints for capabilityaware placement or resource activation. Unlike the general beyondlayering architecture in [3], where optional hints may assist local
decisions without changing the suite semantics or its correctness,
the Dynamic Kernel here operates fully autonomously only from
the QPacket meta-header and node-local state. This choice deliberately tests the hint-free regime: the observed agreement with the
analytical model confirms that hints are not required for correct
execution, but only for possible policy optimization.
As a simple first verification, the simulated configurations matched
the theoretical analysis in Sec. 2.3: in the absence of pre-distributed

A Dynamic-Kernel/QPacket Executable

250

every-3
every-4
middle-only

200

150

100

50

0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Pre-distributed entanglement probability p

Figure 4: Classical signaling load versus pre-distributed entanglement probability for 𝑁 = 100. Increasing 𝑝 reduces
LINK_PREP associated signaling, but can enable further progression before failure for unresolvable link placements.

entanglement, a service request succeeds only if every physical link
in the chain has at least one endpoint exposing MPGEN . Accordingly,
all and every2 always succeed, while all other placements always
fail. This is evident from the rightmost point of Fig. 2, representing
100% success when all nodes have MPGEN , and the leftmost point
of Fig. 3, representing either 100% or 0% success at 𝑝 = 0.
For random capability placement, Fig. 2 matches the closed-form
success probability for a range of network sizes. The figure also
shows that, as the chain length 𝑁 increases, success requires larger
generator probability 𝑔. This is expected: for fixed 𝑔, increasing 𝑁
increases the probability that at least one generator-unresolvable
physical link appears in the chain. The random model should therefore be interpreted as a stress model for autonomous operation. If
generator-capable nodes could be placed intentionally in a known
linear chain, the failure modes observed here can be avoided by
construction. However, the random model can also be interpreted as
capturing uncertain or time-varying generation availability, where
𝑔 is the probability that a node can execute MPGEN when the request
arrives. Such availability may vary because of resource contention,
source dead time, memory occupancy, local policy constraints, etc.
Overall, Fig. 2 quantifies how quickly autonomous link-resolvability
(worst-case scenario) degrades with network size when neither
pre-distributed entanglement nor control-plane hints are available.
Control-plane hints, planned generator placement, waiting policies for temporarily unavailable generators, or alternative service
policies would change the cost and timing model. Exploring these
richer policy spaces is a natural next step enabled by the DynamicKernel/QPacket executable developed in this work.

3.2

Effect of Pre-distributed Entanglement

Here, we evaluate the executable specialization under varying availability of pre-distributed entanglement resources.
Fig. 3 compares the measured success probability with the theoretical model 𝑝 𝑛gen-unres for deterministic capability placements. The
simulations show that failures depend on the link-resolvability condition: any generator-unresolvable physical link must be rescued

1.0

Pre-distributed entanglement probability p

Median classical messages

all
every-2
final-bottleneck

Random placement success surface, N = 100

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.75
0.5
0.25

0.6

0.6

0.1

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Success probability

Classical signaling load versus pre-distribution, N = 100
300

0.0

Generator placement probability g

Figure 5: Success probability under random generator placement with probability 𝑔 and pre-distributed entanglement
with probability 𝑝 for 𝑁 = 100. For each pair (𝑔, 𝑝), the color
indicates the empirical success probability. Contours interpolate samples at iso-success levels 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 0.9.
by pre-distributed entanglement. For finalBottleneck, the success probability follows 𝑝, since the placement leaves exactly one
unresolvable link: every node except the last two exposes MPGEN .
Fig. 4 shows that the classical communication load depends not
only on pre-distributed entanglement, but also on the capability
placement, since the placement determines how far the request
progresses before termination. For placements that are already linkresolvable at 𝑝 = 0, namely all and every2, increasing 𝑝 mainly
replaces runtime link preparation with pre-existing FTQ resources.
Consequently, fewer EPR-pair halves are transmitted during the
service fulfillment and fewer classical synchronization messages
are exchanged. The number of QPacket transmissions remains
essentially fixed by the chain length, since successful requests still
forward the QPacket across the repeater chain.
For unresolvable-link placements, the interpretation is more subtle. As 𝑝 increases, pre-distributed entanglement may allow the
service intent to survive earlier unresolvable links and fail later,
or eventually succeed. The communication load can therefore increase, since more of the service workflow is actually executed. In
this regime, pre-distributed entanglement reduces the need for local
link preparation, but it also increases the amount of signaling and
forwarding performed before termination for runs that ultimately
fail. This is particularly salient from the finalBottleneck scheme
in Fig. 4, which uses nearly the same amount of classical messaging
as the successful schemes despite failing. This observation again
highlights the tight coupling between classical and quantum dynamics in quantum networks, as well as the impact of architectural
choices. Increasing entanglement-resource availability improves
success probability, but the resulting classical signaling load depends on the capability placement, since it determines how far
requests progress before succeeding or failing. Thus, the relevant
question is not simply whether pre-distributed entanglement increases or reduces classical cost; rather, the cost depends on the
interaction among resource availability, node capabilities, and the

Adam Pearson, Marcello Caleffi, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti
Terminal QPacket size, all capability placement, p = 0

Relative QPacket forwarding-delay effect of pre-distributed entanglement

propagation delay fit degree = 1.00

data

emission delay fit degree = 1.99

1010

Accumulated delay (ns)

Terminal number of qubits

QPacket delay components, all capability placement, p = 0

1011

fit degree = 1.00

106

105

QPacket forwarding delay / p = 0 baseline

107

propagation delay data
emission delay data

109

108

107

106

105

104

1.00

0.95

0.90

p=0
p = 0.05

0.85

p = 0.1
p = 0.25

0.80

p = 0.5
p = 0.75
p = 0.9

0.75

p = 0.95
p=1

0.70

101

102

103

104

Number of nodes N

101

102

(a)

103

104

101

Number of nodes N

102

103

104

Number of nodes N

(b)

(c)

Figure 6: QPacket growth and forwarding cost. (a) With all placement and 𝑝 = 0, the terminal QPacket size grows approximately
linearly. (b) Forwarding delay separates into a linear propagation term and a quadratic emission-delay term. (c) Increasing
pre-distributed entanglement probability 𝑝 reduces relative forwarding delay by reducing LINK_PREP stamps.
Dynamic-Kernel pipeline. The instrumentation therefore enables
evaluation beyond success/failure outcomes, including classical signaling load, which is natively supported by the ns-3 environment
and is essential for realistic quantum-network design.
Lastly, we examine how random generator placement behaves
by increasing 𝑝. Fig. 5 reports the success probability as a function
of 𝑔 and 𝑝 for 𝑁 = 100. As expected, both parameters improve success: increasing 𝑔 reduces the occurrence of adjacent non-generator
nodes, while increasing 𝑝 covers otherwise unresolvable links with
pre-distributed entanglement. The heatmap is therefore governed
by the same link-resolvability condition as the deterministic placements, but now with two coverage mechanisms. In the sampled
region, the iso-success contours in Fig. 5 vary more sharply along
the 𝑔 axis than along the 𝑝 axis. This is expected in the considered worst-case autonomous regime: making one node generatorcapable can resolve up to two adjacent physical links, whereas
pre-distributed entanglement resolves only the individual link on
which it is present.

3.3

QPacket Growth

We now focus on the QPacket meta-header growth behavior and
its forwarding cost. Figs. 6a–b show the scaling of the QPacket
meta-header size and of the accumulated time spent forwarding
it. We use the all capability placement with 𝑝 = 0, although the
same results apply to all successful 𝑝 = 0 placements in this case
study, since the number of stamps does not change. The scaling
follows directly from the committed stamp sequence: Alice appends
LINK_PREP and ACT_FORWARD, while each intermediate repeater
appends LINK_PREP, SWAP, and ACT_FORWARD. Hence, the
𝑓 ≥ 0-th forwarded QPacket carries 𝑠 𝑓 = 2 + 3𝑓 stamps. At the
final forwarding step to Bob, 𝑓 = 𝑁 − 2, the terminal number of
accumulated stamps is linear in 𝑁 :
𝑠 𝑁 −2 = 2 + 3(𝑁 − 2) = 𝑂 (𝑁 ).
Because each forwarding event carries the meta-header accumulated so far, linear terminal growth induces a quadratic accumulated
forwarding cost. For an overhead of 𝑐 qubit-equivalents per stamp,

the total QPacket forwarding time is:

𝑇QPacket (𝑁 ) =

𝑁
−2
∑︁

(𝑡 delay + (𝑐𝑠 𝑓 − 1)𝑡 emit ) =

𝑓 =0

(𝑁 − 1)(𝑡 delay − 𝑡 emit ) +




3
1
(𝑁 − 1) 2 + (𝑁 − 1) 𝑐𝑡 emit = 𝑂 (𝑁 2 ).
2
2

To verify this scaling, we fit the simulated accumulated QPacket
forwarding time as:
𝑇QPacket (𝑁 ) = 𝑎(𝑁 − 1) + 𝑏 (𝑁 − 1) 2 .
where the linear coefficient captures the per-hop propagation component, and the quadratic coefficient captures the cost of repeatedly
forwarding a growing meta-header.
The results highlight that the accumulated QPacket forwarding
cost is not determined by network size alone. Indeed, increased
network resources, such as pre-distributed entanglement and associated policies, can affect the required number of actions and
therefore the size and forwarding time of QPackets.
Fig. 6c shows the accumulated forwarding time relative to the
𝑝 = 0 baseline for the all capability placement, chosen so that
failure modes do not factor into this comparison. When 𝑝 = 1,
adjacent links are already present in FTQ: Alice appends only
ACT_FORWARD, while each repeater appends SWAP and
ACT_FORWARD. The 𝑓 -th forward therefore carries fewer stamps
than in the 𝑝 = 0 case, i.e., 1 + 2𝑓 stamps, giving a quadratic leading
term of (𝑁 − 1) 2𝑐𝑡 emit , which is 2/3 the size of the leading term for
𝑝 = 0. The relative delay in Fig. 6c therefore approaches 2/3 as 𝑝
increases, with a slightly larger value due to the additional linear
term. Intermediate 𝑝 values interpolate between these regimes by
reducing the expected number of runtime LINK_PREP stamps.
While these results are specific to this service request and policy,
there is a more general takeaway: QPacket growth is not exclusively
a matter of encoding and network size. It also depends on policy
choices, resource availability, and the granularity of committed
actions. Consequently, QPacket design, policy design, and network
architecture must be evaluated jointly.

A Dynamic-Kernel/QPacket Executable

4

Discussion

This work demonstrated a Q2NS/ns-3 executable specialization
of the Dynamic-Kernel/QPacket logic introduced by the beyondlayering protocol suite [3]. The implementation instantiates QPackets carrying the service intent and append-only action-commit
stamps, together with a node-local Dynamic Kernel Planner–Executor–
Engine processing pipeline. The implementation deliberately targets a scoped service, namely e2e entanglement distribution over a
repeater chain, so that the resulting behavior can be instrumented,
analytically verifiable, and interpreted in terms of explicit policy
choices.
The simulated results match the analysis that for the considered worst-case autonomous regime service-fulfillment success
depends on a link-resolvability condition: each link must have
pre-distributed entanglement or at least one endpoint capable of
entanglement generation. This agreement is significant because the
implementation includes nontrivial Dynamic-Kernel behavior: MPagnostic planning, capability-dependent Executor binding, failure
stamps for non-bindable LINK_PREP actions, QPacket forwarding,
and local soft-state release.
Instrumentation also clarifies how node capabilities and resource
availability shape execution cost, not only success probability. For
placements that already succeed without pre-distributed entanglement, increasing 𝑝 reduces runtime LINK_PREP and therefore
lowers both quantum transmissions and classical synchronization.
For placements with generator-unresolvable links, the effect is
placement-dependent: additional pre-distributed entanglement can
let a request progress farther before succeeding or failing, thereby
exposing later-stage signaling, forwarding, and soft-state-trigger
costs. Thus, the cost of fulfilling a given service intent is not determined by topology, network size, or resource availability in
isolation. It emerges from their interaction with node capabilities
and node-internal state. This is exactly the type of nontrivial dependency that the Dynamic-Kernel pipeline captures without global
synchronization: each node recomputes its continuation from the
QPacket meta-header and its own local state.
The presented executable specialization enables identification
of next technical steps such as richer service intents, additional
MP-library heterogeneity, and specific QPacket encoding choices.
Overall, the paper provides evidence that Q2NS/ns-3 can support
reproducible evaluation of quantum-native protocol-suite concepts,
not only isolated quantum-network primitives.

5

Artifact Availability

Q2NS is released through the ns-3 App Store [14]. The separate artifact for this paper uses Q2NS as the ns-3-based quantum-network
simulation substrate, while providing the Dynamic-Kernel/QPacket
specialization. The artifact includes the added C++ implementation
logic, data collection scripts, raw CSV outputs, and analysis scripts
used to regenerate the main figures, along with a README with
step-by-step instructions. The repository also provides a Dockerbased workflow, supporting easily reproducible execution of the
main experiments. The artifact is available on Zenodo [12] and
GitHub at https://github.com/QuantumInternet-it/q2ns-beyondlayering under release tag icns3-2026-submission.

Acknowledgments
This work has been funded by the European Union under Horizon
Europe ERC-CoG grant QNattyNet, n.101169850. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not
necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European
Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union
nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.

References

[1] Charles H. Bennett, Gilles Brassard, Claude Crépeau, Richard Jozsa, Asher Peres,
and William K. Wootters. 1993. Teleporting an Unknown Quantum State via
Dual Classical and Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Channels. Physical Review Letters
70, 13 (1993), 1895–1899. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.70.1895
[2] H.-J. Briegel, W. Dür, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller. 1998. Quantum Repeaters: The Role
of Imperfect Local Operations in Quantum Communication. Physical Review
Letters 81, 26 (1998), 5932–5935. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.81.5932
[3] Angela Sara Cacciapuoti and Marcello Caleffi. 2026. A Quantum Internet Protocol
Suite Beyond Layering. IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering
(2026), 1–18. doi:10.1109/TNSE.2026.3679795
[4] Marcello Caleffi and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti. 2026. Quantum Internet Architecture: Unlocking Quantum-Native Routing via Quantum Addressing. IEEE
Transactions on Communications 74 (2026), 3577–3599. doi:10.1109/TCOMM.
2025.3650397
[5] Wolfgang Dür, Raphael Lamprecht, and Stefan Heusler. 2017. Towards a quantum
internet. European Journal of Physics 38, 4 (2017), 043001. doi:10.1088/13616404/aa6df7
[6] M. Żukowski, A. Zeilinger, M. A. Horne, and A. K. Ekert. 1993. “Event-readydetectors” Bell experiment via entanglement swapping. Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (Dec
1993), 4287–4290. Issue 26. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.71.4287
[7] Jessica Illiano, Marcello Caleffi, Antonio Manzalini, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti.
2022. Quantum Internet Protocol Stack: A Comprehensive Survey. Computer
Networks 213 (2022), 109092. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2022.109092
[8] H. J. Kimble. 2008. The quantum internet. Nature 453, 7198 (2008), 1023–1030.
doi:10.1038/nature07127
[9] Wojciech Kozlowski, Stephanie Wehner, Rodney Van Meter, Bruno Rijsman, Angela Sara Cacciapuoti, Marcello Caleffi, and Shota Nagayama. 2023. Architectural
Principles for a Quantum Internet. RFC 9340. doi:10.17487/RFC9340
[10] Brahim Lounis and Michel Orrit. 2005. Single-photon sources. Reports on Progress
in Physics 68, 5 (2005), 1129–1179. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/68/5/R04
[11] R. Van Meter, R. Satoh, N. Benchasattabuse, K. Teramoto, T. Matsuo, M. Hajdušek,
T. Satoh, S. Nagayama, and S. Suzuki. 2022. A Quantum Internet Architecture .
In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering
(QCE). 341–352. doi:10.1109/QCE53715.2022.00055
[12] Adam Pearson, Marcello Caleffi, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti. 2026. q2ns-beyondlayering: ICNS3 2026 Submission Artifact. doi:10.5281/zenodo.20446094
[13] Adam Pearson, Francesco Mazza, Marcello Caleffi, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti.
2026. An extensible quantum network simulator built on ns-3: Q2NS design and
evaluation. Computer Networks 283 (2026), 112292. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2026.
112292
[14] Adam Pearson, Francesco Mazza, Marcello Caleffi, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti.
2026. Q2NS ns-3 App Store Release. https://apps.nsnam.org/app/q2ns/.
[15] Adam Pearson, Francesco Mazza, Marcello Caleffi, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti.
2026. Q2NS: Quantum Network Simulator. doi:10.5281/zenodo.19386365
[16] A Pirker and W Dür. 2019. A quantum network stack and protocols for reliable
entanglement-based networks. New Journal of Physics 21, 3 (2019), 033003.
doi:10.1088/1367-2630/ab05f7
[17] Pascale Senellart, Glenn Solomon, and Andrew White. 2017. High-performance
semiconductor quantum-dot single-photon sources. Nature Nanotechnology 12
(2017), 1026–1039. doi:10.1038/nnano.2017.218
[18] Sören Wengerowsky, Siddarth Koduru Joshi, Fabian Steinlechner, Julien R. Zichi,
Sergiy M. Dobrovolskiy, René van der Molen, Johannes W. N. Los, Val Zwiller,
Marijn A. M. Versteegh, Alberto Mura, Davide Calonico, Massimo Inguscio,
Hannes Hübel, Liu Bo, Thomas Scheidl, Anton Zeilinger, André Xuereb, and
Rupert Ursin. 2019. Entanglement distribution over a 96-km-long submarine
optical fiber. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, 14 (2019),
6684–6688. doi:10.1073/pnas.1818752116
[19] W. K. Wootters and W. H. Zurek. 1982. A single quantum cannot be cloned.
Nature 299, 5886 (1982), 802–803. doi:10.1038/299802a0

