Spatio-temporal Path Optimization for
Stabilizer-Code-Protected Quantum Networks
Yuanbo Zhang∗ , Qianfan Wang† , Yangming Zhao‡ , Lin Chen§ , Deke Guo∗
∗ School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University,

zhangyb36@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, guodk@mail.sysu.edu.cn
† Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, qwang742@cityu.edu.hk
‡ State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, ymzhao@nju.edu.cn
‡ School of Intelligent Software and Engineering, Nanjing University Suzhou Campus
§ Engineering Research Centre of Applied Technology on Machine Translation and Artificial Intelligence,

arXiv:2608.22766v2 [cs.NI] 25 Aug 2026

Macao Polytechnic University, lchen@mpu.edu.mo

Abstract—Quantum Error Correction (QEC)-protected direct
transmission is a fundamental approach to preserve fragile
quantum states while they are physically forwarded across noisy
quantum networks. When a logical qubit traverses multiple hops,
selected QEC-capable nodes may recover the encoded state before
it continues along the route. The feasibility and cost of the final
transmission strategy therefore depend on how we jointly choose
the path, the recovery locations, and the protection schemes.
In this paper, we formulate and analyze a cross-layer spatiotemporal path optimization problem for block-style stabilizercode-protected direct transmission. Our main results include
fixed-scheme and flexible-scheme single-flow routing algorithms,
as well as a multi-flow routing algorithm. The framework
developed in this paper can serve as an algorithmic building
block for QEC-aware routing under logical-error and logicallifetime constraints. Simulations show that it reduces single-flow
average routing cost by approximately 25–30% over DecodeAlways and lowers multi-flow throughput-normalized congestion
by approximately 28–31% over Greedy-Assignment.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Quantum networks aim to transmit and process quantum
information across distributed nodes, enabling applications
ranging from secure quantum communication and distributed
quantum computing to networked quantum sensing [1], [2],
[3]. Unlike classical information, quantum states cannot be
copied directly and are vulnerable to channel noise, imperfect
operations, and decoherence during multi-hop communication [4], [5]. Consequently, multi-hop quantum communication
is not merely a connectivity problem: routing must specify
what quantum object is carried across the network and how
its state is protected while traversing noisy channels. This
paper focuses on the direct-transmission paradigm, where
The work of Lin Chen was supported by Science and Technology Development Fund of Macau SAR under Grant 0119/2025/RIA2. The work
of Yangming Zhao was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants 62572233 and 62272428. Corresponding
authors: Lin Chen and Deke Guo. Thanks Jifan Liang for assistance with
the experimental data. This version is an extended version of the ICNP 2026
paper.

quantum information itself is physically forwarded through
noisy channels as encoded logical qubits.1
Direct transmission exposes a concrete protection problem.
To protect quantum states, data qubits can be encoded into
logical qubits using QEC codes [10]. In QEC-protected direct
transmission, a logical qubit is carried by physical qubits and
forwarded over multiple physical channels. Selected QECcapable nodes may perform a local recovery operation, namely
decoding and re-encoding, to refresh the encoded state before
it continues along the route. Such recovery choices, together
with the choice of protection scheme, affect both feasibility
and resource consumption. Therefore, computing a route for
a logical qubit is not only a network-layer path-selection
task, but also a joint decision on the physical path, recovery
placement, and protection scheme.
The key challenge is that QEC recovery makes path computation segment-dependent rather than channel-additive. In
classical routing, a path is often evaluated by adding fixed
link metrics such as cost or delay. In QEC-protected direct
transmission, however, a channel cannot be evaluated independently because recovery operations define its current segment.
Physical noise and propagation time accumulate until the next
recovery operation, and recovery then resets the accumulated
segment state at the price of additional QEC operation cost. 2
Thus, path computation must jointly optimize forwarding decisions, recovery placement, and protection-scheme assignment.
This joint optimization makes the problem segment-dependent
rather than a shortest-path computation over additive channel
metrics.
Two concrete constraints arise. First, a recovery-delimited
segment’s logical-error contribution cannot in general be represented by a sum of fixed channel weights. Instead, it applies
a scheme-dependent nonlinear mapping to the physical noise
1 Another mainstream paradigm is entanglement-based communication,
which distributes entangled pairs and uses teleportation to transfer quantum
states [6], [7], [8], [9].
2 One may ask how this differs from wireless relaying. Decode-and-forward
re-encodes classical messages, while amplify-and-forward forwards noisy
signals [11]; QEC recovery refreshes encoded quantum states and sets path
segments for logical-error and lifetime checks.

accumulated since the last recovery. As a result, a locally
cheap or reliable partial path may become suboptimal after
considering where the next recovery operation is performed.
Second, an encoded logical qubit remains reliable only for a
limited lifetime. In this paper, the inter-recovery time refers
to the elapsed propagation time between two consecutive
recovery operations, and each such segment must stay within
the logical-lifetime budget of the chosen QEC scheme. These
two constraints interact directly: performing recovery more
frequently shortens each segment and reduces accumulated
noise and elapsed time, but increases QEC operation cost;
performing recovery less frequently saves cost, but may violate
the logical-error or lifetime constraints.
Current routing models miss this interaction. Classical
routing uses additive link metrics and constraints, whereas
entanglement-based routing concerns the generation, choice,
and purification of entanglement resources [12]. Existing
studies of QEC-aware direct transmission often treat error
correction as a coarse improvement in fidelity or resource
allocation [13]. Thus, they model neither segment-dependent,
non-additive logical error nor the joint placement of recovery
operation, protection schemes, and the maximum travel time
before the next recovery.
Motivated by this gap, we make three contributions:
We identify and formulate a QEC-aware spatio-temporal
path optimization problem for block-style stabilizer-codeprotected direct transmission. Each encoded code block
serves as a routing unit. We derive a routing-level model
of logical-error evolution from the physical noise accumulated within each segment. The formulation enforces
both end-to-end logical-error and inter-recovery logicallifetime constraints.
• We analyze the computational structure of this problem and show that it is NP-hard even for a single
request with a fixed protection scheme. We then develop a generic QEC-aware spatio-temporal state-space
framework. It separates QEC-specific segment evaluation
from graph-level label-correcting search. Its labels jointly
track routing cost, accumulated logical error, and elapsed
inter-recovery time under discretization and dominance
pruning.
• We instantiate the framework in three settings: fixedscheme routing, flexible protection-scheme assignment,
and multi-flow load balancing. In the multi-flow setting,
we generate feasible candidate strategies for each request
and select among them using an ILP formulation.

•

More broadly, this work provides an algorithmic perspective
for quantum path optimization under physical-layer protection constraints. Rather than treating QEC as a fixed linkquality improvement or a post-processing step, the proposed
framework incorporates recovery operations, code-dependent
logical-error behavior, and logical lifetime directly into path
computation. This perspective can support more general
QEC-aware routing designs for direct-transmission quantum
networks, including networks with heterogeneous protection

schemes, resource-aware recovery placement, and networkwide traffic engineering objectives.
II. P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we review the essential background of QEC
that forms the basis of our network model.
A. Quantum Error Correction with Stabilizer Codes
Quantum Error Correction (QEC) combats physical noise
and decoherence that threaten quantum information. It protects
logical information by encoding it in redundant quantum
degrees of freedom [10]. Unlike classical bits, qubits cannot
be copied to create redundancy due to the no-cloning theorem.
Instead, a QEC code encodes the state of one or more
logical qubits into a block of n physical qubits, so that local
physical errors can be detected and corrected without directly
measuring the encoded logical state.
We use block-style stabilizer-code-based schemes as the
main QEC abstraction because a block of physical qubits can
be treated as one routing unit, matching our segment-based
decode-and-re-encode model. The framework only requires
each scheme to expose a few routing-relevant quantities,
including its logical-error behavior, decoding/re-encoding cost,
and logical decoherence budget; these quantities will be formalized as a scheme profile in Section III. Non-block-style
schemes with inter-block or non-local dependencies require an
extended state model and are outside the present scope [14],
[15]. A stabilizer code is specified by commuting Pauli stabilizer generators [16], whose measurements produce an error
syndrome used for decoding and recovery.
The error-correction capability of a stabilizer code is commonly characterized by its parameters [[n, k, dcode ]]:
• n: the number of physical qubits in the code block;
• k: the number of logical qubits protected by the code.
In our direct-transmission setting, we focus on k = 1,
i.e., each request carries one logical qubit. The extension
to k > 1 is conceptually straightforward: the k logical
qubits encoded in the same block can be treated as one
routing unit, with the QoS and cost metrics defined at the
block level.
• dcode : the code distance. Under the standard adversarial
error model, a code with distance dcode can correct up to
⌊(dcode − 1)/2⌋ arbitrary physical errors.
Stabilizer-code families offer different levels of protection capability, physical-qubit overhead, decoding complexity,
and operational cost. Examples include surface codes [17]
and Steane codes. For routing, we represent these tradeoffs through a profile for each candidate protection scheme.
This profile specifies the decoding/re-encoding cost. It also
records logical-error behavior and logical decoherence time.
The routing algorithm can thus compare schemes without
modeling the internal details of each code family.
B. Logical Error Rate and Decoherence Time
The quality of a QEC-protected channel is characterized by
logical error rate and logical decoherence time derived from
the underlying code and physical noise model.

1) Logical Error Rate: For a given stabilizer code scheme
σ, let n denote the number of physical qubits used to encode
one logical qubit. Let pphys denote the total physical error
probability of a physical qubit, and let pX , pY , and pZ denote
the probabilities of Pauli X (bit-flip), Z (phase-flip), and
Y (both) errors, respectively, where pphys = pX + pY + pZ .
The logical error rate, plog , is the probability that an uncorrectable error occurs on the logical qubit after a full QEC
cycle (i.e., syndrome measurement, decoding, and correction).
For a given physical error rate pphys , the logical error rate is
well-approximated by [18]:
n  
X
n
phys
plog
(p
)
=
(1 − pphys )n−j
σ
j
j=0

j−i 
j  
X
j i X j − i ℓ j−i−ℓ
pX pY
fσ,j (i, ℓ),
·
pZ
ℓ
i
i=0
ℓ=0
(1)
where j denotes the total number of erroneous physical qubits
in the code block. Among these j errors, i are Z errors, ℓ
are X errors, and the remaining j − i − ℓ are Y errors. The
coefficient fσ,j (i, ℓ) is a code- and decoder-specific parameter,
representing the fraction of uncorrectable error patterns with i
Z errors, ℓ X errors, and j − i − ℓ Y errors under scheme σ.
2) Logical Decoherence Time: In a multi-hop quantum
network, the state of a physical qubit is susceptible to errors
induced by decoherence [19]. These errors are typically modeled by the Pauli operators X, Z, and Y. The rate at which
these physical errors occur is characterized by the physical
decoherence time, as well as the logical decoherence time. If
the time between two decoding operations exceeds the logical
decoherence time, the logical qubits suffer an uncorrectable
logical error, which cannot be corrected via QEC codes [19].
To protect logical qubits, it is necessary to decode logical
qubits within logical decoherence time [20].
III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In this section, we develop a novel spatio-temporal network
model for QEC-protected quantum networks.
A. Network Model
We model a quantum network as an undirected graph
G = (V, E).3 Here, V is the set of quantum nodes, and E is
the set of physical channels. The network transmits encoded
qubits directly through physical channels. It does not first
distribute entangled pairs and then teleport quantum states.
Thus, while encoded logical qubits may contain intra-block
quantum correlations, entanglement distribution is not used as
a network-level communication primitive in our model.
1) Node Model: The network consists of three types of
nodes, distinguished by their QEC capabilities:
• Ordinary Switches: These nodes can only forward
encoded qubits to the next hop but perform no QEC
operations. Hereafter, we refer to them as switches;
3 We focus on undirected graphs mainly to keep the analysis concise; our
results can be extended to directed graphs with straightforward adaptation.

Super Switches: These are QEC-capable nodes, at which
the routing strategy may perform a decoding-and-reencoding operation. A decoding node v ∈ V can perform
a full decoding-and-re-encoding operation on a logical
qubit;
• User: These nodes are request endpoints and are equipped
with super switches. We treat user nodes as super
switches in our analysis.
This heterogeneous model of switches, super switches and
users is motivated by the significant resource imbalance
between quantum forwarding and quantum error correction.
Forwarding a logical qubit can be a relatively lightweight
operation, while performing a full QEC cycle is an extremely
demanding task. However, to obtain higher QoS, users are
highly likely to be equipped with super switches. Given this
consideration, we model the network as heterogeneous.
2) Channel Model: Each physical channel e = (u, v) ∈ E
is characterized by three parameters:
• An additive traversal cost ce over channel e, which
can be instantiated as monetary cost or other resource
consumption.
• A channel physical error probability pe , which abstracts
the probability that a single physical qubit experiences a
non-identity physical error during one traversal of channel
e. For Pauli noise, pe = pe,X + pe,Y + pe,Z , where pe,X ,
pe,Y , and pe,Z are the probabilities of X, Y, and Z errors
over channel e, respectively.
• A propagation time te , the physical time-of-flight for a
qubit traversing the channel.
•

B. Strategy and State Evolution
1) Routing and protection strategy formulation: A routing
strategy for a given source-destination pair (s, d) is formally
defined as a triplet π = (P, D, Σ), where:
• P = (v0 , e1 , v1 , . . . , eL , vL ) is a simple physical path
in the graph G, where v0 = s, vL = d, L is the path
length, V (P ) = {v0 , . . . , vL } is its node set, and E(P ) =
{e1 , . . . , eL } is its channel set;
• D ⊆ {v ∈ V (P ) | v is a super switch} is the set of
chosen decoding locations along the path P . Nodes in
V (P ) \ D are designated as forwarding-only;
• Σ = {σv | v ∈ D} is the protection-scheme allocation,
where σv ∈ Sv denotes the protection scheme instance
assigned for the (re-)encoding operation at node v, and
Sv is the set of candidate schemes available at node v.
For routing purposes, each candidate scheme σ ∈ Sv is
characterized by a routing-relevant scheme profile
ϕσ = (cσ , Tσlog , Fσ ),
where cσ is the decoding/re-encoding cost, Tσlog is the logical
decoherence budget, and Fσ maps the accumulated physical
noise on a segment to its logical-error probability. Its Paulinoise instantiation and the segment-level simplification used in
our evaluation are given by Eqs. (3)–(4). The routing algorithm
does not directly model the internal operation of the code or

decoder. Their effect is represented by Fσ , so the abstraction
is only as accurate as this mapping.
The profile above uses an idealized recovery model. It
accounts for the operational cost of decoding and re-encoding
but omits recovery faults and latency. In practice, gates,
measurements, and decoding may introduce errors, while the
recovery process itself takes time. The implementation also
determines whether the logical state remains protected during
recovery. These effects do not alter the structure of our routing
framework. They can be incorporated by augmenting ϕσ with
a scheme-specific recovery error and duration, which are
then included in the error and time updates in the algorithm
proposed later.
This profile-based recovery abstraction also defines the
scope of the current model. It covers block-style stabilizer
codes that protect one logical qubit and support node-local
recovery. Our model does not directly cover entanglementassisted stabilizer codes, convolutional stabilizer codes, or
other stabilizer-based schemes whose operation fundamentally
departs from this block-segment abstraction.
In this paper, we instantiate Sv using surface-code-based
schemes. However, the model itself is not restricted to surface
codes. Any protection scheme that can provide the above
routing-relevant profile can be incorporated into the same optimization framework by replacing the corresponding schemespecific parameters. If |Sv | = 1 for all v, we refer to this
scenario as the fixed-scheme case; otherwise, we refer to it as
the flexible-scheme case.
The total cost of a given strategy π = (P, D, Σ) is the sum
of link traversal costs and the operational costs of the assigned
protection schemes:
X
X
C(π) =
ce +
cσv .
(2)
e∈E(P )

v∈D

2) Segment-Level Error Modeling: A path segment q is
defined as the subsequence of physical channels traversed by
a logical qubit between two consecutive decoding/re-encoding
operations. Let E(q) denote the set of physical channels contained in segment q. We summarize the accumulated segmentlevel physical noise by the composite physical error probability
Y
pcomp
=1−
(1 − pe ).
(3)
q
e∈E(q)

Under independent channel errors, this quantity exactly gives
the probability that at least onePphysical error occurs along
the segment. Only when Sq = e∈E(q) pe ≪ 1 do we use it
as a first-order surrogate for the net non-identity Pauli-error
probability of the composed segment. The omitted multi-error
cancellations, e.g., X · X = I, contribute O(Sq2 ), as shown in
Appendix A. The approximation is not justified when Sq is
large.
To obtain a compact logical-error expression, we use an i.i.d.
depolarizing-channel instantiation for the segment-level noise
model. Specifically, for a composite physical error probability
pcomp
, a physical qubit remains unchanged with probability
q

1 − pcomp
; conditioned on an error, it suffers an X, Y , or Z
q
error with equal probability. Equivalently,
pX = pY = pZ = pcomp
/3.
q
This instantiation yields a simpler expression based on error
weight. It is a reduced form of Eq. (1). Let nσ be the number of
physical qubits used by scheme σ. For weight j, f¯σ,j denotes
the fraction of Pauli error patterns that remain uncorrectable
after decoding. This fraction covers all error locations and
Pauli error types. The coefficient f¯σ,j can be obtained through
decoder-level simulation, experimental characterization, or numerical lookup tables. Then the logical error rate can be
written as
 
nσ
X
nσ
log
comp
¯
fσ,j
(1 − pcomp
)nσ −j (pcomp
)j . (4)
pq,σ (pq ) =
q
q
j
j=0
Our simulations instantiate Fσ using Eq. (4) for low-error
recovery-delimited segments under i.i.d. depolarizing Pauli
noise. This instantiation depends only on the Pauli error
weight and averages over error locations and Pauli types. It
therefore treats all error patterns of the same weight identically
and cannot capture distribution-dependent logical behavior. Its
i.i.d. assumption also excludes spatial and temporal correlations in practical surface-code channels. Independent nondepolarizing Pauli noise can use Eq. (1); loss, erasure, nonPauli, or correlated noise requires a scheme-specific mapping
plog
q,σ (·) calibrated to the channel and decoder. Thus, longdistance repeater links dominated by loss or erasure need a
different segment model. If the new mapping depends only
on the accumulated segment noise represented in the current
model, only Fσ needs to be replaced. Otherwise, the required
noise variables can be added to the labels in the generic statespace framework of Section IV.
Before traversing segment q, suppose that a logical qubit
has a cumulative logical error rate rprev . let plog
q,σ denote the
segment-level logical error rate induced by this segment under
protection scheme σ after the QEC cycle at the segment
endpoint. Under the segment-level independence assumption,
the cumulative logical error rate rnew after traversing the
segment and completing the QEC cycle is
rnew = rprev + (1 − rprev ) · plog
q,σ .

(5)

Equation (5) counts two disjoint cases: a logical error exists
before the segment, or the segment introduces one when there
is no prior error. The update assumes independent segment
errors and ignores cross-segment logical-Pauli cancellations.
Under R = − log(1 − r), Eq. (5) becomes Rnew = Rprev −
log(1 − plog
Let
q,σ ) and is additive across
P recovery segments.
comp
ae = − log(1 − pe ) and Aq =
a
,
so
p
=
q
e∈E(q) e
−Aq
1−e
. Writing Eq. (4) as Fσ , a segment contributes
Ψσ (Aq ) = − log(1 − Fσ (1 − e−Aq )) to R. In general,
Ψσ (A1 + A2 ) ̸= Ψσ (A1 ) + Ψσ (A2 ), so this contribution
is not a sum of fixed physical-channel weights. A detailed
analysis in Appendix B bounds this recurrence error using the
net segment-error input plog,net
, which accounts for Pauli-error
q,σ

cancellations within the segment. It also analyzes the upstream
error from Eqs. (3)–(4) and gives the low-error conditions
for the full approximation chain. Here, r0 is the initial postencoding logical error rate, set to 0 unless specified.
C. Single-Flow Problem Formulation
The objective is to compute a minimum-cost strategy
(P ∗ , D∗ , Σ∗ ) among all feasible strategies. A strategy is
feasible if it satisfies the following two constraints:
1) End-to-End Error Rate Constraint: The final logical
error rate at the destination node, denoted by r, must not
exceed the application-specific threshold rθ , i.e., r ≤ rθ .
2) Logical Decoherence Time Constraint: For every segment q, the segment travel time tseg
q must not exceed the
logical decoherence budget of the protection scheme σ
used at the segment start:
log
tseg
q < Tσ .

(6)

Additional channel-level decoherence or storage-loss
constraints can be incorporated by refining the segmenttime budget, but are not explicitly modeled in this paper.
This formulation defines the single-flow Spatio-Temporal Constrained Path Problem, a state-dependent extension of the
classical Multi-Constrained Path Problem (MCPP).
Classical MCPP assigns each edge fixed additive weights for
cost and constrained resources [21], [22]. Our problem can
be cast as MCPP by treating each recovery-delimited segment
and protection scheme as one edge in an expanded graph
and omitting combinations that violate the lifetime bound. On
the physical graph, however, a segment’s accumulated noise
is transformed into logical error through a scheme-dependent
nonlinear mapping. Consequently, its logical-error contribution
cannot generally be expressed as a sum of fixed weights
assigned to individual physical channels. Our framework
avoids enumerating all such segments and scheme choices by
retaining the segment state in QEC-aware label transitions to
be introduced in the next section.
The following sections instantiate the framework for one
fixed scheme (Section IV), flexible schemes (Section V), and
multi-flow candidate generation (Section VI).
IV. G ENERIC S TATE -S PACE F RAMEWORK FOR
S INGLE -F LOW C OMPUTATION
In this section, we first develop the generic state-space
framework for the fixed-scheme single-flow setting. In this
base case, the protection scheme is fixed for all recovery nodes,
so the index σ denoting the encoding instance will be omitted,
log
and we use plog
instead. To characterize the intrinsic
q ,T
difficulty of our problem, we first study its decision version.
The following theorem shows that even deciding whether a
feasible strategy exists is computationally intractable.
Theorem 1. The corresponding optimization problem of finding a minimum-cost feasible strategy is NP-hard.
The proof of Theorem 1, given in Appendix C, sets all
physical error rates to zero. Thus, provided that zero physical

noise yields zero logical error, the NP-hardness result is
independent of the first-order approximation. The reduction
from the Shortest Weight-Constrained Path Problem (SWCPP)
therefore locates the source of NP-hardness in constrained
path selection rather than in logical-error evolution. This result
of worst case leaves open pseudo-polynomial approaches for
suitably bounded instances.
Framework Overview. The framework consists of three
parts. First, state expansion maps node-local forwarding and
recovery choices into an auxiliary graph H = (VH , EH ).
Second, a QEC-aware label-transition procedure extends a
partial label across one auxiliary channel by updating traversal
cost, segment noise, elapsed time, and, at recovery nodes,
the cumulative logical error. Third, a dominance-based labelcorrecting search keeps only Pareto-efficient labels in the
dimensions of cost, logical error, and elapsed inter-recovery
time. The fixed-scheme case below uses H = G′ , while the
flexible-scheme instantiation in Section V uses H = G′′ .
Construction of the Auxiliary Graph. We construct the
auxiliary graph G′ from the original graph G via state-space
expansion. The key idea is to convert the node-local operation
choice, i.e., forwarding or decoding, into a path choice in the
auxiliary graph. In this way, routing and decoding-placement
decisions can be handled in a unified manner.
For each original node v, let A(v) denote its corresponding
auxiliary node set:


if v is an ordinary switch,
{vfo },
A(v) = {vfo , vde }, if v is an intermediate super switch,


{dde },
if v = d.
Here, vfo represents forwarding the logical qubit without
decoding, while vde represents decoding and re-encoding at
super switch v. For each original channel (u, v) ∈ E, we add
an auxiliary channel (u′ , v ′ ) for every u′ ∈ A(u) and every
v ′ ∈ A(v), with the same traversal cost cu,v .
An example of the auxiliary graph G′ is shown in Fig. 1(b).
The path (sfo , ufo , vde , dde ) represents a strategy that forwards
the logical qubit at super switch u, and performs decoding at
v and d.
Data structure. For each node v ∈ VH in the auxiliary
graph, we maintain a label set Lv . Each label l ∈ Lv represents
a partial strategy from the source s to node v. Specifically, a
label is a quintuple l ≜ (c, r̂, t̂, q, v1 ), where:
c is the cost accumulated along the partial strategy
represented by l;
• r̂ is the discretized cumulative logical error rate of the
logical qubit at node
k Given the actual logical error rate
j v.
r
r, we define r̂ ≜ ∆r ∆r , where ∆r is the discretization
step size for the error-rate dimension;
• t̂ is the discretized elapsed time since the last decoding
operation.
Given the actual elapsed time t, we define t̂ ≜
j k
t
∆
,
where
∆t is the time discretization step size;
t
∆t
• q is the current segment-noise accumulator. It records the
physical error probabilities of the channels traversed since
•

Algorithm 2 E XTEND L ABEL(l, e, v)
s

u

v

d

(a) Original graph G.

sfo

ufo

vfo

ude

vde

dde

(b) Auxiliary graph for single-scheme assignment (G′ ).

ufo

vfo

1: Input: label l = (c, r̂, t̂, q, pred), channel e = (u, v)
2: q ′ ← q ∪ {pe }

3: t̂′ ← (t̂ + te )/∆t ∆t
4: if v is a forwarding node or an ordinary switch then
5:
return (c + ce , r̂, t̂′ , q ′ , u)
6: end if
7: if v is a decoding node using scheme σ then
8:
if t̂′ ≥ Tσlog then
9:
return infeasible
10:
end if
11:
compute pcomp
by Eq. (3)
q′

compute plog
q ′ ,σ by Eq. (4)
13:
rnew ← r̂ + (1 − r̂)plog
q ′ ,σ
14:
r̂′ ← ⌊rnew /∆r ⌋ ∆r
15:
if r̂′ > rθ then
16:
return infeasible
17:
end if
18:
return (c + ce + cσ , r̂′ , 0, ∅, u)
19: end if
12:

sfo

u1de

1
vde

d1de

u2de

2
vde

d2de

(c) Further auxiliary graph for multi-scheme assignment
(G′′ ).
Fig. 1. An example of transforming the original graph G into the auxiliary
graphs G′ and G′′ . White nodes represent forwarding-only switches, and
orange nodes represent decoding-capable super switches.

Algorithm 1 Generic Framework for QEC-Aware Label Correction
1: Input:auxiliary state-space graph H = (VH , EH ), source
s, destination d, and discretization steps ∆r , ∆t
2: Output: a minimum-cost feasible strategy, if one exists
3: for each node v ∈ VH do
4:
Lv ← ∅
5: end for
6: Ls ← {(0, ⌊r0 /∆r ⌋∆r , 0, ∅, ∅)}
7: Q ← {s}
8: while Q ̸= ∅ do
9:
u ← D EQUEUE(Q)
10:
for each channel e = (u, v) ∈ EH do
11:
for each label l ∈ Lu do
12:
lnew ← E XTEND L ABEL(l, e, v)
13:
if lnew is feasible then
14:
if I NSERTA ND P RUNE(lnew , Lv ) then
15:
E NQUEUE(Q, v) if v ∈
/Q
16:
end if
17:
end if
18:
end for
19:
end for
20: end while
21: if Ld = ∅ then
22:
return no feasible strategy
23: else
24:
choose the minimum-cost label in Ld
25:
reconstruct the path and operations by backtracking
predecessors
26:
return the corresponding strategy (P̂ , D̂, Σ̂)
27: end if

Algorithm 3 I NSERTA ND P RUNE(l, Lv )
1: if l is dominated by some label in Lv then
2:
return false
3: end if
4: remove all labels in Lv dominated by l
5: add l to Lv
6: return true

the last decoding operation. It is used to compute the
composite physical error probability pcomp
;
q
• v1 is the predecessor of v in the auxiliary graph and is
used for path reconstruction.
Given two labels li = (ci , r̂i , t̂i , ∗, ∗), i = 1, 2, we say that l1
dominates l2 if c1 ≤ c2 , r̂1 ≤ r̂2 , and t̂1 ≤ t̂2 . The dominance
is strict if at least one inequality holds strictly. Intuitively, a
dominated label cannot lead to a better feasible continuation
than the label dominating it. Therefore, dominated labels can
be safely removed from Lv .
Algorithm. Algorithm 1 follows a label-correcting search
over the auxiliary graph H. For each node v ∈ VH , the
algorithm maintains a set of non-dominated labels Lv , where
each label represents a partial strategy from the source s to
v. Starting from the initial label at s, the algorithm repeatedly dequeues a node u and relaxes each outgoing channel
e = (u, v) using all labels in Lu .
Each channel relaxation invokes the QEC-aware labeltransition procedure E XTEND L ABEL in Algorithm 2. If v is
a forwarding node, the label is extended by accumulating the
traversal cost, segment time, and model-specific noise state.
If v is a decoding node, the procedure evaluates plog
q,σ from
the segment-noise state and updates the cumulative logical
error by Eq. (5). The label is retained only if both the endto-end error-rate constraint and the logical decoherence-time

constraint are satisfied; after decoding, the segment time and
segment-noise accumulator are reset.
Algorithm 3 uses I NSERTA ND P RUNE to maintain each label
set under the dominance rule. It first rejects any feasible label
that is already dominated by an existing label at the same
auxiliary node. Otherwise, it inserts the new label and removes
all existing labels dominated by it. In this way, each label set
stores only Pareto-efficient partial strategies in terms of cost,
logical error rate, and elapsed time since the last decoding
operation. When the search terminates, Algorithm 1 returns the
minimum-cost label in Ld and reconstructs the corresponding
strategy by backtracking predecessors.
Since the logical error rate and the elapsed segment time are
discretized with step sizes ∆r and ∆t , respectively, the number
of non-dominated labels stored at each node is bounded by the
number of discretized error-time states. Therefore, each label
−1
set has size at most O(∆−1
r ∆t ) within the feasible range.
Hereafter, c(P ) is the auxiliary-path cost and r(P ) is the
routing-layer error computed by Eqs. (3)–(5). The guarantee
below bounds discretization error relative to this model, not
physical-model mismatch.
Definition 1. For a segment q, let Tqlog be the logical decoherence time of its assigned protection scheme. An s-d path
P is called an (ϵr , ϵt )-optimal feasible path if c(P ) ≤ c(P ∗ ),
log
for every
r(P ) ≤ (1 + ϵr )rθ , and tseg
q (P ) ≤ (1 + ϵt )Tq
segment q of P .
Theorem 2. Let T log be the logical decoherence time of a
path traversing all nodes in VH . If ∆r ≤ ϵr |VrHθ | and ∆t ≤
log

T
ϵt |V
, where ∆r and ∆t are asymptotically O(ϵr /|VH |) and
H|
O(ϵt /|VH |), respectively, then with input H = (VH , EH ),
Algorithm 1 outputs an (ϵr , ϵt )-optimal feasible path.

The proof is in Appendix D. The output of our framework
allows for relaxed constraints and does not yield an exact costapproximation ratio. The same theoretical guarantees apply to
a higher-order or exact error model if it uses the existing label
state, supports incremental updates, preserves dominance, and
has the same asymptotic extension cost. If additional state is
required, the label bound and complexity must be re-derived.
log
Space and time complexity of Algorithm 1. Let Tmax
=
log
maxσ Tσ and let NL be the maximum number of labels
stored at one node. Labels are indexed by discretized logical
error rate and
time. After dominance pruning,
 elapsedlogsegment

−1
rθ −r0 Tmax
NL = O ∆ r · ∆ t
= O(|VH |2 ϵ−1
r ϵt ). Here, ∆r =
O(ϵr /|VH |) and ∆t = O(ϵt /|VH |). Hence, the space com−1
plexity of generic framework is O(|VH |3 ϵ−1
r ϵt ). The running
3
−1 −1
time is O(|VH | |EH |ϵr ϵt ). For the fixed-scheme instantiation H = G′ , where |V ′ | = O(|V |) and |E ′ | = O(|E|), these
−1
3
−1 −1
become O(|V |3 ϵ−1
r ϵt ) and O(|V | |E|ϵr ϵt ), respectively.
V. F LEXIBLE -S CHEME S INGLE -F LOW I NSTANTIATION
We next instantiate the generic framework for the flexiblescheme single-flow variant of the base problem formulated
in Section III-C. In this variant, each decoding-capable super
switch can choose one protection scheme from its candidate

set. Therefore, the algorithm must jointly optimize the path
P , the decoding placement D, and the scheme assignment
Σ. Compared with the fixed-scheme instantiation, the labelcorrecting core and QEC-aware label-transition procedure remain unchanged; only the state expansion is refined to encode
scheme choices.
For clarity of presentation, we first assume that all super
switches are equipped with the same set of b candidate
protection schemes. The framework naturally extends to the
heterogeneous case where different super switches have different candidate sets, by adapting the graph transformation
locally for each node.
To solve this problem, we extend the auxiliary-graph construction from G′ to a scheme-expanded graph G′′ . For each
super switch v, we create one forwarding node vfo and b
1
b
i
decoding nodes vde
, . . . , vde
, where vde
represents decoding
and re-encoding under protection scheme σi . For each ordinary
switch v, we create one forwarding node vfo .
For channel reconstruction, let A(v) denote the set of
auxiliary nodes corresponding to an original node v:


if v is an ordinary switch,
{vfo },
1
b
A(v) = {vfo , vde , . . . , vde }, if v is a super switch,

 1
{dde , . . . , dbde },
if v = d.
For each original channel (u, v) ∈ E, we add an auxiliary
channel (u′ , v ′ ) for every u′ ∈ A(u) and v ′ ∈ A(v), with the
same traversal cost cu,v .
An example of G′′ is shown in Fig. 1(c), where each super
switch has two candidate schemes. For example, the path
1
(sfo , ufo , vde
, d2de ) represents a strategy that forwards the logical
qubit at u, decodes and re-encodes it at v using scheme σ1 ,
and finally decodes it at d using scheme σ2 .
The joint optimization over routing, decoding placement,
and scheme assignment is then obtained by running Algorithm 1 with H = G′′ .
Space and time complexity. The complexity follows directly from the generic framework with H = G′′ . If each
super switch has b candidate schemes, then |V ′′ | = O(b|V |)
and |E ′′ | = O(b2 |E|) in the worst case. Therefore, the total
−1
space complexity is O(b3 |V |3 ϵ−1
r ϵt ), and the running time
−1
is O(b5 |V |3 |E|ϵ−1
r ϵt ).
VI. M ULTI -F LOW N ETWORK -W IDE I NSTANTIATION
The formulation in Section III-C focuses on a single
communication request. We now use the generic framework
for candidate generation in the multi-flow setting. Multiple
requests share the same physical network and may compete
for channel resources. Let K denote the set of flows, and let
(si , di ) be the source-destination pair of flow i ∈ K. Unlike
the single-flow case, where the objective is to minimize the
cost of one feasible strategy, the multi-flow setting must also
account for network-wide congestion.
We adopt a two-stage approach:
• First, we invoke Algorithm 1 with a relaxed dominance
rule to generate a pool of candidate feasible strategies for
each flow.

Second, we select one candidate strategy for each flow
so as to minimize the maximum congestion level over all
channels.
To generate candidate strategies, we modify the dominance
rule in Algorithm 3. Instead of keeping only non-dominated
labels, we allow a new label to be inserted if it is dominated
by fewer than M existing labels in Lv . This maintains up
to M representative candidates for each discretized state. At
the destination, the algorithm returns up to M minimum-cost
feasible strategies for each flow; if fewer than M feasible
strategies exist, all of them are returned.
Let Πi denote the candidate strategy pool of flow i, and let
ai denote its throughput demand. For a strategy π ∈ Πi , let
E(π) denote the set of physical channels used by its path. We
formulate the following path-allocation ILP:
•

min
s.t.

y
X

∀i ∈ K,

xi,π = 1,

π∈Πi

X

X

ai xi,π ≤ y,

∀e ∈ E,

i∈K π∈Πi : e∈E(π)

xi,π ∈ {0, 1},

∀i ∈ K, π ∈ Πi .

The first constraint ensures that each flow selects exactly
one candidate strategy. The second constraint upper-bounds
the total throughput routed over each physical channel by
the maximum congestion variable y. The objective therefore
minimizes bottleneck congestion.
We solve the LP relaxation and independently select π ∈
Π
Πi for each flow with probability x∗i,π . Let yOPT
denote the
optimal integral congestion of the above allocation problem
for the fixed candidate pools {Πi }.
Theorem 3. Assume that throughput demands are normalized
so that 0 ≤ ai ≤ 1, and let n = |V |. There exists a constant
κ > 0 such that, with probability at least 1 − 1/n, randomized
rounding achieves an O(log n/ log log n) approximation to
Π
.
yOPT
The theorem guarantees only allocation over the generated
candidate pools. The standard randomized-rounding proof is
given in Appendix E. It does not compare with the global
optimum over routing, decoding decisions and so on. Overall
quality therefore depends on whether each Πi contains diverse
feasible strategies, particularly alternatives that use different
channels. This is affected by M and the relaxed dominance
rule.
VII. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
In this section, we evaluate four aspects of the proposed
framework: single-flow routing against static recovery policies, adaptive scheme assignment, multi-flow congestion, and
running-time scalability.
A. Simulation Setup
1) Simulator: We implement the evaluation in Python using
NetworkX [23] for graph operations and PuLP with CBC

TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF E NCODING S CHEMES U SED IN S IMULATIONS
Scheme Name
Surface (d=3)
Surface (d=5)
Surface (d=7)
Surface (d=9)

[[n,k,dcode ]]
[[13,1,3]]
[[41,1,5]]
[[85,1,7]]
[[145,1,9]]

Cost
5
8
10
50

Decoherence Time(µs)
50
100
200
600

solver for the ILP [24], [25]. It targets the routing abstraction
rather than hardware and protocol events, which are the focus
of NetSquid, SeQUeNCe, and QuISP.
2) Network Topology: We use the Barabási-Albert (BA)
model to generate reproducible and scalable topologies with
heterogeneous connectivity for controlled evaluation. These
topologies are not replicas of a specific deployment, and the
results may vary for different topologies. Unless otherwise
specified, the four experiments use networks with 100, 100,
50, and 500 nodes, respectively. The average degree is set to 2,
and a fraction psuper = 0.4 of nodes are randomly designated
as QEC-capable super switches.
3) Physical Parameters: We model a metro-scale quantum
network. For each channel e, its length Le is drawn from an
exponential distribution with mean 2 km. The physical error
rate pe is computed from photon loss under fiber attenuation
α = 0.15 dB/km [26]:

αLe
3
1 − 10− 10 .
(7)
pe (Le ) =
4
The propagation time is calculated as te = Le /vfiber , where
vfiber ≈ 3.3 × 105 m/s.
4) Protection Schemes: We use surface-code schemes with
dcode = 3, 5, 7, 9; Table I lists their qubit counts, costs, and
decoherence times. We estimate f¯σ,j via Monte Carlo decoder
simulations with minimum-weight perfect matching (MWPM).
For each (σ, j), we sample and decode weight-j Pauli patterns,
marking a failure if the residual error induces a nontrivial
logical operation.
5) Compared Algorithms: Decode-Always and ForwardAlways are recovery-placement ablations. Greedy-Assignment
is an allocation-stage ablation, whereas SPF is an independent
multi-flow baseline:
• Decode-Always: A QEC-aware baseline that performs
decoding at every super switch. It uses a simplified
label-correcting algorithm that only explores paths with
decoding at all available super switches.
• Forward-Always: Performs no intermediate recovery
and treats intermediate super switches as forwarding-only
nodes.
• Greedy-Assignment: Selects the lowest-cost strategy for
each flow from the same candidate pool, without global
congestion optimization.
• Shortest-Path-First (SPF): An independent, cost-aware
classical baseline. It computes each flow’s minimum-cost
physical path under the same link-cost metric, without
our QEC-aware candidate generation or global congestion
optimization, and then applies the same feasibility check.

80%

60%

40%

0%
0.00

Proposed
Decode-Always
Forward-Always
0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

End-to-End Error Rate Threshold (rθ)

Proposed (Multi-Scheme d=3,7,9)
Single-Scheme (d=3)
Single-Scheme (d=7)
Single-Scheme (d=9)

20%

0.00

60
40
20

0.15

0.20

0.15

0.20

0.25

40

20

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

End-to-End Error Rate Threshold (rθ)

10
8
6
4
2
0

10

20

30

40

50

(c) Multi-Flow: Maximum Link Congestion

6 × 10

4 × 10
3 × 10

2 × 10

10

0.25

−1

Proposed (LP)
Greedy-Assignment
Shortest-Path-First

−1

−1

−1

−1

10

20

30

40

50

Number of Concurrent Flow Requests

(e) Adaptive Scheme Assignment: Avg Cost

Execution Time

Proposed (LP)
Greedy-Assignment
Shortest-Path-First

12

Number of Concurrent Flow Requests

Proposed (Multi-Scheme d=3,7,9)
Single-Scheme (d=3)
Single-Scheme (d=7)
Single-Scheme (d=9)

(f) Multi-Flow: Normalized Congestion

Execution Time

Average Running Time (s)

Average Execution Time (s)

60

0
0.00

0.25

(d) Core Algorithm Validation: Avg Cost

40

0.10

80

80

End-to-End Error Rate Threshold (rθ)

0.05

End-to-End Error Rate Threshold (rθ)

(b) Adaptive Scheme Assignment: Accept Ratio

Average Path Cost

Average Path Cost

100

0.10

40%

0.25

Proposed
Decode-Always
Forward-Always

120

0.05

60%

0%

(a) Core Algorithm Validation: Accept Ratio

0
0.00

80%

Congestion per Unit of Throughput

20%

Average Maximum Link Congestion

100%

Path Acceptance Ratio

Path Acceptance Ratio

100%

30

20

10

0

4

3

2

1

0
50

100

150

200

250

300

Number of Nodes in Network

350

400

(g) Running Time vs. Number of Nodes

1

2

3

4

Number of Encoding Schemes per Super Switch

(h) Running Time vs. Number of Schemes

Fig. 2. Performance evaluation: (a) and (d) validate the core algorithm; (b) and (e) evaluate adaptive scheme assignment; (c) and (f) report multi-flow
performance; and (g) and (h) report running time.

Together, these baselines isolate the effects of recovery
placement, per-flow path selection, and global allocation. Classical MCPP solvers and the QEC approaches to be introduced
in Section VIII lack the same segment logical-error and
inter-recovery lifetime constraints. Comparing them requires
surrogate metrics and recovery policies, which we leave to
future cross-model evaluation.

6) Performance Metrics: We report five primary metrics:
path acceptance ratio, average accepted-path cost, maximum
channel congestion, congestion per unit throughput, and multischeme running time. The four experiments (Fig. 2) average
500, 500, 100, and 500 independent runs, respectively. The
multi-flow experiment uses M = 3, allowing up to three
candidates per flow. A larger M increases both candidate
diversity and computation.

B. Core Algorithm Validation
This experiment validates the fixed-scheme instantiation of
the proposed framework in a single-flow setting using the
dcode = 9 surface code. Fig. 2a shows that the framework
achieves an acceptance ratio comparable to Decode-Always
and clearly higher than Forward-Always. Under strict errorrate thresholds, Proposed and Decode-Always accept about
85% of requests, whereas Forward-Always accepts only about
43%. This confirms the necessity of intermediate QEC operations.
The cost advantage is shown in Fig. 2d. Compared with
Decode-Always, the proposed framework reduces the average
path cost by approximately 25–30%, e.g., from about 125 to
94 under the strictest threshold and from about 87–89 to 62
when rθ = 0.25. This is because it performs decoding only
when necessary, achieving a better cost-feasibility trade-off.

C. Advantage of Adaptive Scheme Assignment
This experiment evaluates the benefit of adaptive scheme
assignment in a single-flow, multi-scheme setting. We compare
the proposed multi-scheme algorithm with fixed single-scheme
strategies using dcode = 3, 7, or 9.
As shown in Fig. 2b, the weak dcode = 3 scheme is
inexpensive but unreliable under strict thresholds, accepting
only about 8% of requests, while Proposed and the robust
dcode = 9 scheme accept about 85%. Fig. 2e further shows that
Proposed achieves this high feasibility at much lower cost: its
average cost decreases from about 40 to 15 as rθ increases,
whereas the fixed dcode = 9 strategy remains around 93 to 62.
Thus, adaptive scheme assignment reduces cost by roughly
55–75% compared with always using the strongest scheme,
while preserving a similar acceptance ratio.
D. Network-Level Performance (Multi-Flow)
We next evaluate the network-level performance of the
proposed framework in a multi-flow setting. Fig. 2c shows that
raw maximum congestion rises with the number of concurrent
flows for all methods. Since they accept different traffic
volumes, Fig. 2f normalizes congestion by throughput.
At 50 concurrent flows, Proposed reaches about 0.18–0.19,
versus about 0.26 for Greedy-Assignment and 0.24–0.25 for
Shortest-Path-First. These values represent reductions of approximately 28–31% and 23–25%, respectively. The GreedyAssignment gap quantifies the benefit of global allocation.
E. Running Time
Finally, we evaluate the computational scalability of the
proposed framework. As shown in Fig. 2g and Fig. 2h, the
running time grows with both the network size |V | and the
number of available schemes b. It remains below 1 second for
networks with about 40 nodes and grows to about 43 seconds
for 400 nodes. The dependence on b is sharper: the running
time increases from about 0.05 seconds for b = 1 to about 1.2
seconds for b = 3 and about 4.7 seconds for b = 4, consistent
with the O(b2 ) growth of auxiliary channels in the schemeexpanded graph.
VIII. R ELATED W ORK
Classical MCPP handles fixed additive edge weights using
multi-label Bellman–Ford or Dijkstra variants [21], [22]. Our
formulation retains this search structure. However, it uses segment states and QEC-aware label transitions rather than fixed
physical-channel logical-error weights, to adapt to quantumnetwork constraints [1].
Quantum routing either distributes entangled pairs or sends
encoded qubits directly. The first paradigm creates end-to-end
entanglement through generation, swapping, and purification.
Prior work studies redundancy, fidelity-aware purification,
multi-flow distribution, and opportunistic routing [27], [8],
[7], [28]. Other studies address end-to-end fidelity, delay,
distillation, latency, memory-limited repeaters, and purification
scheduling [29], [30], [31], [32], [9]. Surveys further highlight
quantum-specific constraints such as swapping probability,

fidelity, optical loss, and short entangled-state lifetimes [12].
These studies emphasize state quality and time but distribute
entanglement rather than route encoded data qubits.
The second paradigm, which is the focus of this paper, sends
quantum information through physical channels and protects it
with quantum error correction (QEC). Fowler et al. introduced
surface-code-based quantum communication [33]. Later work
studied physical-qubit transmission, including fidelity-based
multicast [34]. More recently, SurfaceNet proposed a faulttolerant architecture that uses surface codes to preserve and
transfer quantum messages [35]. Hu et al. showed that surfacecode-aware routing improves communication fidelity and network throughput [13]. Follow-up work optimizes surfacecode structures for quantum-network error correction [36].
These works are closely related to our setting because they
consider QEC-protected communication and heterogeneous
quantum-network resources. However, they use coarser fidelity
or resource abstractions. They also do not jointly enforce
segment logical error, recovery placement, scheme selection,
and inter-recovery lifetime.
Recent work also studies routing beyond entanglement
distribution. Circuit switching and packet switching have
been considered for quantum secure direct communication
networks [37]. These studies broaden quantum-network design
but do not address stabilizer-code-protected decode-and-reencode routing.
In summary, prior work has laid important foundations
for both paradigms of quantum networking. Nevertheless,
the literature remains weighted toward entanglement distribution and repeater-based routing. Existing work on QECprotected direct transmission has yet to capture how routing
and recovery interact with accumulated physical noise, decoding placement, logical errors, and finite logical lifetime.
This paper addresses this gap. We formulate a joint spatiotemporal path optimization problem for block-style stabilizercode-protected direct transmission. Our framework uses a
generic state space to jointly optimize path selection, decoding
placement, and protection-scheme assignment under logicalerror and decoherence-time constraints.
IX. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied direct transmission of encoded
qubits over noisy quantum networks. Unlike entanglementbased teleportation, direct transmission requires joint selection
of paths, recovery locations, and protection schemes. We
formulated this spatio-temporal problem with non-additive
segment logical error and lifetime constraints, and developed
a framework for fixed and flexible schemes and multi-flow
routing. Simulations show a better cost-feasibility trade-off and
lower normalized congestion. The model assumes block-style
node-local recovery. Future work will include recovery faults
and latency, realistic correlated noise, other QEC architectures,
and multi-path routing. A broader evaluation will cover additional topology models, statistical error bars, sensitivity to size
of multi-flow pool, and stronger multi-flow baselines.

R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Zhang, C. Papagianni, F. Speelman, and P. Grosso, “Toward complete
quantum network stacks: A survey,” IEEE Network, vol. 38, no. 5, pp.
153–159, 2024.
[2] D. Main, P. Drmota, D. P. Nadlinger, E. M. Ainley, A. Agrawal, B. C.
Nichol, R. Srinivas, G. Araneda, and D. M. Lucas, “Distributed quantum
computing across an optical network link,” Nature, vol. 638, pp. 383–
388, 2025.
[3] D.-H. Kim, S. Hong, Y.-S. Kim, Y. Kim, S.-W. Lee, R. C. Pooser, K. Oh,
S.-Y. Lee, C. Lee, and H.-T. Lim, “Distributed quantum sensing of
multiple phases with fewer photons,” Nature Communications, vol. 15,
no. 1, p. 266, 2024.
[4] W. Kozlowski and S. Wehner, “Towards Large-Scale Quantum
Networks,” in Proceedings of the Sixth Annual ACM International
Conference on Nanoscale Computing and Communication. Dublin
Ireland: ACM, Sep. 2019, pp. 1–7. [Online]. Available: https:
//dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3345312.3345497
[5] A. S. Cacciapuoti, J. Illiano, S. Koudia, K. Simonov, and M. Caleffi,
“The Quantum Internet: Enhancing Classical Internet Services One
Qubit at A Time,” IEEE Network, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 6–12,
Sep. 2022, conference Name: IEEE Network. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9964024
[6] D. Bouwmeester, J.-W. Pan, K. Mattle, M. Eibl, H. Weinfurter, and
A. Zeilinger, “Experimental quantum teleportation,” Nature, vol. 390,
no. 6660, pp. 575–579, 1997.
[7] K. Chakraborty, D. Elkouss, B. Rijsman, and S. Wehner, “Entanglement
distribution in a quantum network, a multi-commodity flow-based approach,” IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering, vol. 1, pp. 1–21,
2020.
[8] Y. Zhao, G. Zhao, and C. Qiao, “E2E fidelity aware routing and
purification for throughput maximization in quantum networks,” in IEEE
INFOCOM 2022 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications,
2022, pp. 480–489.
[9] L. Chen and Z. Jia, “On Optimum Entanglement Purification
Scheduling in Quantum Networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 1779–1792, Jul. 2024, conference
Name: IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. [Online].
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10477477
[10] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum computation and quantum
information, 10th ed. Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2010.
[11] J. N. Laneman, D. N. C. Tse, and G. W. Wornell, “Cooperative diversity
in wireless networks: Efficient protocols and outage behavior,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 3062–3080,
2004.
[12] A. Abane, M. Cubeddu, V. S. Mai, and A. Battou, “Entanglement
routing in quantum networks: A comprehensive survey,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.01234, 2024.
[13] T. Hu, J. Wu, and Q. Li, “Quantum network routing based on surface
code error correction,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), 2024, pp. 1236–1247.
[14] M. Grassl and M. Rötteler, “Constructions of quantum convolutional
codes,” in 2007 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 816–820.
[15] M. M. Wilde and T. A. Brun, “Entanglement-assisted quantum convolutional coding,” Physical Review A, vol. 81, no. 4, p. 042333, 2010.
[16] D. Gottesman, “Stabilizer codes and quantum error correction,” 1997.
[17] A. G. Fowler, M. Mariantoni, J. M. Martinis, and A. N. Cleland,
“Surface codes: Towards practical large-scale quantum computation,”
Physical Review A, vol. 86, no. 3, p. 032324, Sep. 2012. [Online].
Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.86.032324
[18] D. Forlivesi, L. Valentini, and M. Chiani, “Logical Error Rates
of XZZX and Rotated Quantum Surface Codes,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, pp. 1–1, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10477919/
[19] M. Schlosshauer, “Quantum decoherence,” Physics Reports, vol. 831,
pp. 1–57, Oct. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S0370157319303084
[20] C. Ryan-Anderson, J. Bohnet, K. Lee, D. Gresh, A. Hankin,
J. Gaebler, D. Francois, A. Chernoguzov, D. Lucchetti, N. Brown,
T. Gatterman, S. Halit, K. Gilmore, J. Gerber, B. Neyenhuis, D. Hayes,
and R. Stutz, “Realization of Real-Time Fault-Tolerant Quantum
Error Correction,” Physical Review X, vol. 11, no. 4, Dec. 2021,

publisher: American Physical Society (APS). [Online]. Available:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.11.041058
[21] Z. Wang and J. Crowcroft, “Bandwidth-delay based routing algorithms,” in Proceedings of IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference
(GLOBECOM ’95), vol. 3, 1995, pp. 2129–2133.
[22] E. Q. V. Martins, “On a multicriteria shortest path problem,” European
Journal of Operational Research, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 236–245, 1984.
[23] A. A. Hagberg, D. A. Schult, and P. J. Swart, “Exploring network
structure, dynamics, and function using NetworkX,” in Proceedings of
the 7th Python in Science Conference, G. Varoquaux, T. Vaught, and
J. Millman, Eds., Pasadena, CA, USA, 2008, pp. 11–15.
[24] S. Mitchell, M. O’Sullivan, and I. Dunning, “PuLP: A linear
programming toolkit for python,” Department of Engineering Science,
The University of Auckland, Tech. Rep., 2011. [Online]. Available:
https://optimization-online.org/2011/09/3178/
[25] J. Forrest and R. Lougee-Heimer, “CBC user guide,” in Emerging Theory, Methods, and Applications, ser. INFORMS Tutorials in Operations
Research. INFORMS, 2005, pp. 257–277.
[26] G. P. Agrawal, Fiber-optic communication systems. John Wiley & Sons,
2012.
[27] Y. Zhao and C. Qiao, “Redundant entanglement provisioning and
selection for throughput maximization in quantum networks,” in IEEE
INFOCOM 2021 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications,
2021, pp. 1–10.
[28] A. Farahbakhsh and C. Feng, “Opportunistic routing in quantum networks,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2022 - IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications, 2022, pp. 490–499.
[29] V. Kumar, C. Cicconetti, M. Conti, and A. Passarella, “Routing in
quantum networks with end-to-end knowledge,” IET Quantum Communication, 2025.
[30] M. Chehimi, K. Goodenough, W. Saad, D. Towsley, and T. X. Zhou,
“Entanglement distribution delay optimization in quantum networks
with distillation,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 1871–1886, 2025.
[31] J. Liu and Y. Wang, “Statistical modeling and latency optimization for
entanglement routing in quantum networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering
(QCE), 2025.
[32] E. A. Van Milligen, E. Jacobson, A. Patil, G. Vardoyan, D. Towsley, and
S. Guha, “Entanglement routing over networks with time multiplexed
repeaters,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE), 2025.
[33] A. G. Fowler, D. S. Wang, C. D. Hill, T. D. Ladd, R. Van Meter, and
L. C. L. Hollenberg, “Surface code quantum communication,” Physical
Review Letters, vol. 104, no. 18, p. 180503, 2010.
[34] X.-J. Wang, L.-X. An, F.-X. Meng, X.-T. Yu, and Z.-C. Zhang, “A
multicast scheme based on fidelity metrics in quantum networks,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 65 703–65 713, 2019.
[35] T. Hu, J. Wu, and Q. Li, “SurfaceNet: Fault-tolerant quantum networks
with surface codes,” IEEE Network, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 155–162, 2024.
[36] ——, “Disparity surface code: Optimizing error correction in quantum
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE), 2025, pp. 2493–2504.
[37] Z.-Z. Sun, Y.-B. Cheng et al., “Quantum communication network routing
with circuit and packet switching strategies,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 1887–1900, 2025.
[38] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, Computers and intractability: a guide
to the theory of NP-completeness, 27th ed., ser. A series of books in the
mathematical sciences. New York [u.a]: Freeman, 2009.

A PPENDIX A
F IRST-O RDER A PPROXIMATION OF S EGMENT-L EVEL
PAULI E RRORS
We justify the first-order approximation in our composite
channel model. Consider a path segment q, and let E(q) denote
its set of physical channels. For each channel e ∈ E(q), let Pe
denote the Pauli error that it introduces on a physical qubit,
where
Pe ∈ {I, X, Y, Z}.

Let
Pr(Pe ̸= I) = pe .
Equivalently, if the error is represented in the Pauli basis, then

physical error occurs, then Pq ∈ {X, Y, Z} and hence Pq ̸= I.
Therefore, cancellation to the identity is possible only when
at least two physical errors occur. Let
Nq =

pe = pe,X + pe,Y + pe,Z ,
where pe,X , pe,Y , and pe,Z are the probabilities of X, Y, and
Z errors on channel e, respectively. We assume that errors
introduced by different channels are independent.
The exact Pauli operator accumulated over segment q is the
product
Y
Pq =
Pe ,
e∈E(q)

be the number of non-identity physical errors in segment q.
Then
net
pocc
≤ Pr(Nq ≥ 2).
q − pq

By the union bound over all unordered pairs of channels,

e∈E(q)

Proposition 1 (Pauli-cancellation error is second order). Let
X
Sq =
pe .

Pr(Pe ̸= I, Pe′ ̸= I) = pe pe′ .
Thus,
pe pe′ .

{e,e′ }⊆E(q)

Finally,

X

Then

{e,e′ }⊆E(q)


2
Sq2
1 X
pe  =
.
pe pe′ ≤
2
2
e∈E(q)


X

net

0 ≤ pocc
q − pq ≤ Pr

1{Pe ̸=I} ≥ 2

Therefore,

e∈E(q)

X

net
0 ≤ pocc
≤
q − pq

pe pe′

{e,e′ }⊆E(q)
Sq2

2

X

Pr(Nq ≥ 2) ≤

e∈E(q)

≤

Pr(Pe ̸= I, Pe′ ̸= I).

{e,e′ }⊆E(q)

may overestimate pnet
Clearly, pocc
q , because multiple nonq
identity Pauli errors can compose to the identity.

≤

X

Pr(Nq ≥ 2) ≤

Under the independent channel-error assumption,

In contrast, the probability that at least one physical error
occurs in the segment is
Y
pocc
= Pr (∃e ∈ E(q) : Pe ̸= I) = 1 −
(1 − pe ).
q



1{Pe ̸=I}

e∈E(q)

where multiplication is taken modulo global phase. The exact
net Pauli error probability of the segment is
pnet
= Pr(Pq ̸= I).
q

X

Sq2
.
2

It remains to relate these quantities to the first-order term.
Since
Y
pocc
=1−
(1 − pe ),
q

.

Consequently,

e∈E(q)

2
pnet
= pocc
q
q + O(Sq ) =

X

pe + O(Sq2 ).

e∈E(q)

its inclusion-exclusion expansion gives

Thus, the approximation error caused by Pauli cancellation is
O(Sq2 ).
Proof. The event {Pq ̸= I} implies that at least one nonidentity Pauli error has occurred, but the converse is not always
true because multiple Pauli errors may compose to the identity.
Therefore,
pnet
≤ pocc
q
q ,
which gives
net
pocc
≥ 0.
q − pq
net
Next, observe that pocc
q and pq can differ only when at least
two non-identity Pauli errors occur in the segment. Indeed,
if no physical error occurs, then Pq = I; if exactly one

pocc
=
q

X

pe + O(Sq2 ).

e∈E(q)

Combining this with
2
pnet
= pocc
q
q + O(Sq )

yields
pnet
=
q

X

pe + O(Sq2 ).

e∈E(q)

This proves that Pauli cancellation contributes an O(Sq2 )
approximation error in the low-error regime.

A PPENDIX B
E XACT L OGICAL -E RROR C OMPOSITION AND
A PPROXIMATION C HAIN

where
µprev
+ µprev
+ µprev
+ µprev
= 1.
I
X̄
Ȳ
Z̄
Let

This appendix separates the two approximations underlying
Eq. (5). The complete approximation chain compares the
exact-input logical-Pauli model
F

σ
exact
−−→
plog,net
pnet
−→ rnew
q
q,σ

with the routing model

rprev = µprev
+ µprev
+ µprev
= 1 − µprev
I
X̄
Ȳ
Z̄
be the pre-segment logical failure probability.
For a fixed segment q and decoding scheme σ, let
(q,σ)
(q,σ)
(q,σ)
(q,σ) 
λ(q,σ) = λI , λX̄ , λȲ , λZ̄
be the logical Pauli distribution induced by the segment and
subsequent decoding/re-encoding operation when the exact net
segment input is used, where

Fσ
model
−−→
plog
pcomp
q
q,σ −→ rnew .

The first difference arises from using pcomp
as a surroq
gate for the net segment-level Pauli error probability pnet
q .
The second replaces exact logical-Pauli composition with the
scalar recurrence in Eq. (5). We first propagate the upstream
segment-model error and then combine it with the recurrencecomposition bound. The additive transformation of Eq. (5)
applies to the routing-level scalar recurrence; the exact logicalPauli composition below also depends on the error-type distributions through the cancellation term.
For scheme σ, define the logical-error mapping
 
nσ
X
nσ
¯
fσ,j
Fσ (x) =
(1 − x)nσ −j xj .
(8)
j
j=0
The output of Eq. (4) remains
comp
plog
).
q,σ = Fσ (pq

and Sq defined
Using the exact net Pauli error probability pnet
q
in Appendix A, introduce the accurate-input quantity
plog,net
= Fσ (pnet
q,σ
q ).
Let
Lσ = max |Fσ′ (x)|.
x∈[0,1]

The derivative of the Bernstein polynomial in Eq. (8) is


nX
σ −1
nσ − 1
Fσ′ (x) = nσ
(f¯σ,j+1 − f¯σ,j )
(1 − x)nσ −1−j xj .
j
j=0

(q,σ)

λI

(q,σ)

(q,σ)

+ λX̄

+ λȲ

(q,σ)

(q,σ)

plog,net
= λX̄
q,σ

+ λȲ

= 1 − λI

(q,σ)

where the multiplication is taken modulo global phase. In
particular, the exact post-segment logical failure probability
satisfies
X
(q,σ)
exact
rnew
= rprev + (1 − rprev )plog,net
−
µprev
.
q,σ
L λL
L∈{X̄,Ȳ ,Z̄}

Proof. The exact post-segment logical Pauli operator is obtained by composing the pre-existing logical Pauli error with
the residual logical Pauli error induced by the new segment.
Therefore, the post-segment distribution is the convolution of
µprev and λ(q,σ) over the logical Pauli group.
To derive the exact logical failure probability, it suffices to
compute the probability that the post-segment logical operator
equals the identity. Since for Pauli operators modulo global
phase we have AB = I if and only if A = B,
(q,σ)

µnew
= µprev
λI
I
I

(q,σ)

+ µprev
λX̄
X̄

+ µprev
λȲ
Ȳ

(q,σ)

+ µprev
λZ̄
Z̄

.

Hence
exact
rnew
= 1 − µnew
I
(q,σ)
(q,σ)
= 1 − µprev
λI
+ µprev
λX̄
I
X̄

(q,σ)
prev (q,σ)
+ µprev
λ
+
µ
λ
.
Ȳ
Ȳ
Z̄
Z̄

(10)
Using

Let
L = {I, X̄, Ȳ , Z̄}
denote the logical Pauli operators modulo global phase. Suppose that before traversing a path segment q, the residual
logical error on the logical qubit is described by a distribution

µprev = µprev
, µprev
, µprev
, µprev
,
I
X̄
Ȳ
Z̄

.

A,B∈L:
AB=L

Proposition 1 and the mean-value theorem then give
Lσ Sq2
.
2

(q,σ)

+ λZ̄

Proposition 2 (Exact logical-error composition). Under the
logical-Pauli abstraction above, the exact post-segment logical
Pauli distribution is given by the Pauli-group convolution
X prev (q,σ)
µnew
=
µA λB ,
∀L ∈ L,
L

0≤j<nσ

log,net
|plog
| ≤ Lσ |pcomp
− pnet
q,σ − pq,σ
q
q |≤

= 1,

and

(q,σ)

Because the Bernstein basis is nonnegative and sums to one
on [0, 1],
Lσ ≤ nσ max |f¯σ,j+1 − f¯σ,j |.
(9)

(q,σ)

+ λZ̄

µprev
= 1 − rprev ,
I

(q,σ)

λI

= 1 − plog,net
,
q,σ

we obtain
exact
rnew
= rprev + (1 − rprev )plog,net
q,σ
X
prev (q,σ)
−
µL λL .
L∈{X̄,Ȳ ,Z̄}

This proves the claim.
Proposition 3 (Recurrence-composition bound). Let
approx
rnew
= rprev + (1 − rprev )plog,net
q,σ

denote the scalar recurrence with the accurate segment
logical-error input. Then
approx
exact
0 ≤ rnew
− rnew
≤ rprev plog,net
.
q,σ

Consequently, if
rprev ≤ ε

plog,net
≤ ε,
q,σ

and

then
approx
exact
rnew
≤ ε2 ,
− rnew

i.e., the approximation error is second-order in the low-error
regime.
Proof. By Proposition 2,
approx
exact
rnew
− rnew
=

(q,σ)

X

µprev
L λL

.

O(ε2 ) one-step error relative to exact logical-Pauli composition.
Corollary 1 (Symmetric logical depolarizing special case).
If the pre-segment residual logical error and the segmentinduced logical error are both symmetric over the three nonidentity logical Pauli operators, i.e.,
rprev
,
µprev
= µprev
= µprev
=
X̄
Ȳ
Z̄
3
and
plog,net
q,σ
(q,σ)
(q,σ)
(q,σ)
,
λX̄ = λȲ
= λZ̄
=
3
then
exact
rnew
= rprev + (1 − rprev )plog,net
−
q,σ

Equivalently,
4
exact
rnew
= rprev + plog,net
− rprev plog,net
.
q,σ
q,σ
3
Proof. Under the symmetry assumptions,

L∈{X̄,Ȳ ,Z̄}

Since every term in the above sum is nonnegative, we have

X

(q,σ)

µprev
L λL

=3·

rprev plog,net
rprev plog,net
q,σ
q,σ
·
=
.
3
3
3

Substituting this identity into the exact composition formula
in Proposition 2 yields the desired expression.

Moreover,
approx
exact
rnew
− rnew
=

X
L∈{X̄,Ȳ ,Z̄}

approx
exact
rnew
− rnew
≥ 0.

rprev plog,net
q,σ
.
3

(q,σ)

µprev
L λL

L∈{X̄,Ȳ ,Z̄}



prev
prev
≤ µprev
+
µ
+
µ
X̄
Ȳ
Z̄


(q,σ)
(q,σ)
(q,σ)
+ λZ̄
· λX̄ + λȲ
= rprev plog,net
.
q,σ

A PPENDIX C
P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
In this appendix, we prove Theorem 1. We first introduce
the decision version of the problem and show that it is NPcomplete. This immediately implies that the corresponding
optimization problem is NP-hard.

Combining Eq. (10) with Proposition 3 yields

Min-Cost Feasible Strategy Decision Problem (MCFSD).
Input: A network instance under our model, a sourcedestination pair (s, d), a cost budget B, an end-to-end logical
error threshold rθ , and the code/time parameters.
Question: Does there exist a strategy π = (P, D, Σ) such
that
1) P is an s-d simple path;
2) the total strategy cost satisfies C(π) ≤ B;
3) the final logical error rate satisfies r(π) ≤ rθ ; and
4) each segment delimited by two consecutive decoding
operations satisfies the logical decoherence constraint?

model
exact
model
approx
approx
exact
|rnew
− rnew
| ≤ |rnew
− rnew
| + |rnew
− rnew
|
2
Lσ Sq
≤ (1 − rprev )
+ rprev plog,net
.
q,σ
2
(11)
Under the independent-channel and depolarizing assumptions
used above, the complete one-step error is O(ε2 ) when Sq =
O(ε), rprev = O(ε), plog,net
= O(ε), and Lσ = O(1). If
q,σ
these conditions hold over m recovery segments, summing
the one-step bounds gives the conservative accumulated bound
O(mε2 ). Therefore, under these low-error conditions, the firstorder approximation chain used by the routing model has

Proof of Theorem 1. We prove NP-hardness by exploiting the
decision version MCFSD. Specifically, we show that MCFSD
is NP-complete by a polynomial-time reduction from the
Shortest Weight-Constrained Path Problem (SWCPP). Since
a polynomial-time algorithm for the optimization problem
would also solve MCFSD, the optimization problem is NPhard.
Step 1: MCFSD is in NP: A certificate is a strategy π =
(P, D, Σ). We can verify in polynomial time that:
• P is a simple s-d path;
• D is a valid set of decoding locations on P ;

Therefore,
approx
exact
0 ≤ rnew
− rnew
≤ rprev plog,net
.
q,σ

are at most ε, then the right-hand
If both rprev and plog,net
q,σ
side is bounded by ε2 . This proves the claimed O(ε2 ) error
bound.
The update actually computed by Eqs. (3)–(5) is
model
rnew
= rprev + (1 − rprev )plog
q,σ .

Σ assigns an available code scheme to each node in D;
the total cost C(π) is at most B;
• every segment satisfies the decoherence-time constraint;
and
• the final logical error rate is at most rθ .
Indeed, all these checks require only a polynomial-time scan
of the path and its segments, together with polynomial-time
evaluation of the cost function, the segment-time constraints,
and the logical-error update rule. Here we treat the code
parameters, lookup tables, and the coefficients used by the
logical-error model as either fixed constants of the instance
or data that can be accessed in polynomial time. Therefore,
MCFSD belongs to NP.
Step 2: NP-hardness: We reduce from SWCPP, a known
NP-complete problem [38]. The description of the SWCPP is
as follows.
•
•

Shortest Weight-Constrained Path Problem (SWCPP).
Input: A graph G = (V, E), a source s ∈ V , a destination
d ∈ V , an integer channel cost ce ≥ 0 for each e ∈ E, an
integer channel weight we ≥ 0 for each e ∈ E, and two integer
budgets B, W ≥ 0.
Question: Does there exist an s-d simple path P such that
X
X
ce ≤ B
and
we ≤ W ?
e∈P

e∈P

Reduction construction: Given any SWCPP instance, we
build an instance of MCFSD as follows.
1) Underlying graph. Use the same graph G = (V, E)
with the same source s and destination d.
2) Node types. Let only s and d be super switches. Every
node in V \ {s, d} is set to be an ordinary switch. Thus,
no intermediate node can perform decoding.
3) Code schemes. Equip both s and d with exactly one
code scheme σ. Set its decoding cost to
cσ = 0.
4) Channel costs. For every channel e ∈ E, set its traversal
cost in our model to be exactly the SWCPP cost:
c′e = ce .
5) Propagation times. For every channel e ∈ E, set its
propagation time to be exactly the SWCPP weight:
te = we .
6) Physical error rates. For every channel e ∈ E, set
pe = 0.
Hence, every composite physical error rate is zero, and
therefore the final logical error rate is zero as well.
7) Logical decoherence time. Set the logical decoherence
time of the unique code scheme σ to
Tσlog = W + 1.
This construction is clearly computable in polynomial time.

Key property of the construction: Due to all intermediate
nodes are ordinary switches, decoding can only occur at
d (with the source s serving as the starting point of the
transmission). Therefore, for any chosen s-d path P , the entire
path forms exactly one segment.
Thus, the segment-time constraint in our model becomes
X
te < Tσlog .
e∈P

By construction, te = we and Tσlog = W + 1, so this is
equivalent to
X
we < W + 1.
e∈P

Since all we are integers, the above strict inequality holds if
and only if
X
we ≤ W.
e∈P

Moreover, since all pe = 0, the logical error rate along any
path is zero. Hence, the end-to-end logical error constraint is
automatically satisfied for any nonnegative threshold rθ (for
example, one may simply set rθ = 0).
Finally, because the unique code scheme has zero decoding
cost, the total strategy cost equals the path cost:
X
X
C(π) =
c′e =
ce .
e∈P

e∈P

Therefore,
C(π) ≤ B

⇐⇒

X

ce ≤ B.

e∈P

Correctness of the reduction. We prove both directions of
the equivalence.
(⇒) Suppose the SWCPP instance is a YES-instance. Then
there exists an s-d path P such that
X
X
ce ≤ B
and
we ≤ W.
e∈P

e∈P

Consider the corresponding strategy π in the constructed
MCFSD instance that follows the same path P . Since there is
no intermediate super switch, the whole path is one segment.
The segment-time constraint holds because
X
X
te =
we ≤ W < W + 1 = Tσlog .
e∈P

e∈P

The logical error constraint holds because all physical error
rates are zero. The total strategy cost is
X
C(π) =
ce ≤ B.
e∈P

Hence, the constructed MCFSD instance is also a YESinstance.
(⇐) Conversely, suppose the constructed MCFSD instance is
a YES-instance. Then there exists a feasible strategy π with
total cost at most B. Since only s and d are super switches,

the strategy determines an s-d path P and the whole path is
a single segment. Feasibility implies
X
te < Tσlog = W + 1.
e∈P

Using te = we and the integrality of the weights, we obtain
X
we ≤ W.
e∈P

Also,
X

ce = C(π) ≤ B.

e∈P

Therefore, P is a feasible solution to the original SWCPP
instance. So the SWCPP instance is a YES-instance.
Conclusion. We have shown that the SWCPP instance is a
YES-instance if and only if the constructed MCFSD instance
is a YES-instance. Thus, SWCPP polynomially reduces to
MCFSD, so MCFSD is NP-hard. Combining this with the
fact that MCFSD is in NP, we obtain that MCFSD is NPcomplete.
Suppose, for contradiction, that a minimum-cost feasible
strategy could be found in polynomial time. Then we could
solve MCFSD in polynomial time by computing the minimum
feasible cost and comparing it with the budget B. This
contradicts the NP-completeness of MCFSD. Therefore, the
optimization problem is NP-hard.
A PPENDIX D
P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
Proof. Let P̂ denote the path returned by Algorithm 1 on
H = (VH , EH ), and let r̂(P̂ ) and t̂(P̂ ) denote its discretized
logical error rate and discretized segment time, respectively.
Let P ∗ be an optimal feasible path, and let l∗ be the label
corresponding to P ∗ at the destination.
First, we show that c(P̂ ) ≤ c(P ∗ ). During the labelcorrecting process, a label is removed only when it is dominated by another label with no larger cost, no larger logical
error rate, and no larger elapsed segment time. Hence, pruning
a dominated label cannot remove all minimum-cost feasible
continuations. Therefore, the label corresponding to P ∗ either
remains in Ld or is dominated by another label in Ld with cost
no larger than c(P ∗ ). Since Algorithm 1 returns the minimumcost label in Ld , we have c(P̂ ) ≤ c(P ∗ ).
Next, we bound the error-rate violation introduced by errorrate discretization. Suppose ∆r ≤ ϵr rθ /|VH |. Since the
logical error rate is rounded down with step size ∆r , each
discretization step may underestimate the true error rate by
at most ∆r . In the worst case, such rounding occurs at most
|VH | times along a simple path in the auxiliary graph. Thus,
r(P̂ ) ≤ r̂(P̂ ) + ∆r |VH |.
Because Algorithm 1 accepts the output label only when
r̂(P̂ ) ≤ rθ , we obtain
r(P̂ ) ≤ rθ + ∆r |VH | ≤ (1 + ϵr )rθ .

Finally, we bound the violation of the logical decoherencetime constraint. Suppose ∆t ≤ ϵt T log /|VH |. Since elapsed
time is rounded down with step size ∆t , each discretization
step may underestimate the true elapsed time by at most
∆t . Along any segment, the accumulated underestimation is
therefore at most ∆t |VH |. Hence, for any segment q of P̂ ,
seg
tseg
q (P̂ ) ≤ t̂q (P̂ ) + ∆t |VH |.

Because the algorithm accepts a segment only when t̂seg
q (P̂ ) <
Tqlog , we have
log
log
tseg
q (P̂ ) < Tq + ∆t |VH | ≤ (1 + ϵt )Tq .

Therefore, P̂ is an (ϵr , ϵt )-optimal feasible path.
A PPENDIX E
P ROOF OF THE M ULTI -F LOW A PPROXIMATION
G UARANTEE
In this appendix, we prove the approximation guarantee of
the randomized rounding policy used in Section VI. Recall
that K is the set of flows, Πi is the fixed candidate strategy
pool of flow i, and ai is the throughput demand of flow i.
We assume that the throughput demands are normalized so
Π
denote the optimal value of the
that 0 ≤ ai ≤ 1. Let yOPT
candidate-restricted integral path-allocation problem, and let
y ∗ denote the optimal value of its LP relaxation. Clearly, y ∗ ≤
Π
yOPT
.
The randomized rounding policy independently selects one
strategy π ∈ Πi for each flow i with probability x∗i,π , where
{x∗i,π } is an optimal solution to the LP relaxation. For a
physical channel e ∈ E, let Xe denote the total rounded
congestion on channel e. Then
X
X
Xe =
ai Xi,π ,
i∈K π∈Πi : e∈E(π)

where Xi,π is the indicator variable that flow i selects strategy
π. Since each flow is rounded independently, the random
variables contributed by different flows are independent. Moreover, each contribution is bounded by 1 due to the normalization 0 ≤ ai ≤ 1.
The expected congestion on channel e is
X
X
Π
E[Xe ] =
ai x∗i,π ≤ y ∗ ≤ yOPT
.
i∈K π∈Πi : e∈E(π)

Let µe = E[Xe ]. For any λ > 1, by the Chernoff bound for
independent bounded random variables,
Π

λyOPT
eµe
Π
.
Pr[Xe ≥ λyOPT
]≤
Π
λyOPT
Π
Since µe ≤ yOPT
, we have
Π
Pr[Xe ≥ λyOPT
]≤

Π
 e λyOPT

λ

Π
Assuming yOPT
≥ 1, this further implies
 e λ
Π
Pr[Xe ≥ λyOPT
]≤
.
λ

.

Set λ = κ log n/ log log n for a sufficiently large constant
κ, where n = |V |. Then
 e λ
1
= exp(−λ log(λ/e)) ≤ 3 ,
λ
n
for sufficiently large n and a suitable constant κ. Therefore,
for any fixed channel e,
1
.
n3
Finally, by the union bound over all physical channels, and
using |E| ≤ n2 , we obtain
Π
Pr[Xe ≥ λyOPT
]≤


 |E|
1
Π
Pr ∃e ∈ E : Xe ≥ λyOPT
≤ 3 ≤ .
n
n
Thus, with probability at least 1−1/n, every channel has conΠ
Π
gestion at most λyOPT
= O(log n/ log log n) · yOPT
. Hence,
randomized rounding achieves the stated approximation ratio
for the fixed candidate pools with high probability.

