1

Quantum-Classical Coexistence
Network Tomography
Xuchuang Wang∗, Joseph C. Chapman†, Aneesh Ramaswamy†, Matheus Guedes de Andrade∗,
Yu-Zhen Janice Chen∗, Joseph M. Lukens†‡, Gayane Vardoyan∗, Don Towsley∗
∗College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA, USA
†Quantum Information Science Section, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA
‡Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering and
Purdue Quantum Science and Engineering Institute, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
Emails: xuchuangw@gmail.com, {mguedesdeand, yuzhenchen, gvardoyan, towsley}@cs.umass.edu,
{chapmanjc, ramaswamya}@ornl.gov, jlukens@purdue.edu

Abstract—Quantum-classical coexistence networks

(QCNs)
share optical fiber between quantum and classical signals via
wavelength-division multiplexing, offering a practical path to
deploying quantum communication over existing telecom in-
frastructure. However, co- and counter-propagating classical
traffic introduce distinct depolarization noise on the quantum
channel, complicating channel characterization. We develop a
tomography framework that infers per-link channel parame-
ters of a QCN from end-to-end measurements alone. We first
model each coexisting fiber by decomposing the quantum signal
evolution into photon loss, successful transmission, and three
direction-dependent depolarization components. Building on this
model, we derive closed-form link-level estimators for all channel
parameters, and then extend the approach to star-topology
networks through a system of multiplicative equations across
end-node pairs, along with a simple classical-signal-direction-
switching protocol that resolves the remaining unknowns. Us-
ing these methods, we analyze single-link experimental testbed
data and confirm accurate recovery of per-link depolarization
probabilities, with estimated process fidelities closely tracking
the Bayesian-process-tomography baseline across multiple fiber
lengths and wavelengths; the small residual gaps reflect the
depolarization-only model approximation. As no multi-link coex-
istence testbed yet exists, we validate the star-network estimators
on emulated multi-link paths composed of copies of measured
single-link channels. Furthermore, we extend our framework in
two directions: (i) we propose a quantum-channel model that
factorizes the coexisting fiber into a depolarizing-with-loss signal
channel and a Raman-noise-injection channel acting on separate
optical modes—a completely-positive,
trace-preserving tensor
product—and show that the link observables reduce exactly to
our basic model; and (ii) we generalize the star-network approach
to arbitrary topologies via a peeling algorithm (trees) and a
least-squares estimator (meshes), which Monte-Carlo simulations
confirm recover per-link parameters on tree and cyclic-mesh
networks under a correctly-specified model.

Index Terms—Quantum-classical coexistence, network tomog-
raphy, quantum communications, channel estimation, Raman
scattering.

I. INTRODUCTION

Quantum networks [1] are essential infrastructure for emerg-
ing quantum technologies, including quantum key distribu-
tion (QKD) [2], distributed quantum computing [3], [4], and

quantum sensing [5]. However, deploying dedicated optical
fibers exclusively for quantum communication is prohibitively
expensive and impractical at scale. A promising alternative is
the quantum-classical coexistence network (QCN), in which
quantum and classical signals share the same optical fiber
(called a coexisting fiber)—typically separated via wavelength-
division multiplexing (WDM) [6]. By leveraging existing
fiber deployments, QCNs offer a cost-effective path toward
large-scale quantum networking. At the same time, classical
signals generate noise—primarily through spontaneous Raman
scattering—that degrades the fidelity of the co-existing quan-
tum states, making the characterization of these impairments
a prerequisite for the reliable design and operation of practical
QCNs.

Network tomography [7] provides a principled approach
to this characterization problem: it infers internal link-level
parameters from end-to-end measurements alone, without re-
quiring direct access to every individual
link. In classical
networks, tomography techniques have been widely studied
for estimating link delays, loss rates, and available bandwidth
from path-level observations. For QCNs, network tomography
is particularly compelling because, as the network scales,
independently characterizing each fiber link becomes infea-
sible, yet accurate knowledge of per-link parameters—such as
photon loss and depolarization induced by classical traffic—is
critical for tasks such as entanglement routing [8], [9], error
budgeting [10], and resource allocation [11]. Developing to-
mography methods tailored to the physics of quantum-classical
coexistence channels can therefore enable efficient, scalable
characterization of large QCNs using only measurements at
network edge nodes.

Achieving this goal, however, poses several key chal-
lenges. First, no established mathematical model exists for
the coexisting fiber channel that captures the quantum signal
degradation caused by classical traffic; such a model is a
necessary foundation before any tomography inference can
be formulated. Second, a tractable network-level model must
also be developed to relate end-to-end observations to internal

This manuscript has been co-authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the US Department of Energy (DOE). The US government retains and the
publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the US government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce
the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for US government purposes. DOE will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in
accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).

arXiv:2608.09364v1  [cs.IT]  10 Aug 20262

link parameters across multiple nodes and links. Third, the
coexistence setting introduces a richer parameter space than
dedicated quantum or classical networks alone: each link
must be characterized not only by its intrinsic transmission
loss but also by direction-dependent depolarization parameters
arising from co- and counter-propagating classical signals,
substantially increasing the number of unknowns and making
the tomographic inverse problem more challenging.

A. Contributions

The main contributions of this work are as follows.

• Coexisting-fiber channel model. We formulate the first
channel model for a coexisting fiber, decomposing the quan-
tum signal evolution into photon loss, successful transmission,
and direction-dependent depolarization with three parame-
ters for the no-classical-signal, co-propagation, and counter-
propagation scenarios—capturing the noise structure unique
to QCNs (§II).
• Closed-form link tomography. We derive a quantum link
tomography (QLT) method that estimates all parameters of a
single coexisting fiber—the success ratio, the photon-loss ratio,
and the three depolarization ratios—in closed form from end-
to-end measurements, and we characterize its bias and variance
(§IV).
• Quantum-channel (CPTP) formulation. We recast
the
coexisting fiber as a CPTP channel on two optical modes:
the tensor product of a depolarizing-with-loss signal channel
on the signal mode and a Raman-noise-injection channel on
the broadband mode into which the classical signal scatters.
The excess photons that coexistence delivers are then carried
by a two-mode photon-number observable rather than by the
trace of the state, and the link observables reduce exactly to
the basic model (§III).
• Star-network tomography with provable identifiability.
We extend QLT to star-topology QCNs, recovering per-link
success ratios from a system of multiplicative equations across
end-node pairs and resolving the remaining per-link depo-
larization parameters via a classical-signal-direction-switching
protocol. We prove that a single such flip removes the residual
gauge degeneracy (§V).
topologies. We prove a path-observable com-
• General
position rule (Proposition 4) showing that
the coexistence
observables compose multiplicatively along a path even though
Raman injection makes the received ratio a per-photon yield
rather than a survival probability. Building on it, we give a
tree-peeling estimator that adapts the progressive-etching peel-
ing of [12], developed there for bit-/phase-flip channels with
SPAM errors. For general graphs, we give a log-linear least-
squares solver together with an incidence-rank identifiability
condition (§V-A).
• Validation by experiment, emulation, and simulation. We
validate QLT on coexisting-fiber experimental testbed data,
confirming model correctness and estimator accuracy against
measured depolarization probabilities and process fidelities
(matching the Bayesian-process-tomography baseline) across
multiple fiber lengths and wavelengths (§VI). As no multi-
link coexistence testbed yet exists, we emulate star networks

by recombining the measured link data into multi-link paths
(§VI-C), and validate the general-topology estimators with
fully synthetic Monte-Carlo simulations, together verifying
estimator correctness, identifiability, and sample-complexity
scaling (§VI-D).

B. Related Work

Quantum-classical coexistence networks. Townsend [6]
first demonstrated the feasibility of transmitting quantum
information—specifically for QKD—over a classical fiber
network by applying WDM to separate quantum and classical
channels. Subsequent work has focused on improving the
capacity and reach of QCNs; an early systematic study of
this regime is Patel et al. [13], who quantified the direction-
dependent Raman noise that limits high-bit-rate QKD-plus-
data coexistence. For example, Wang et al. [14] demonstrated
long-distance co-propagation of QKD alongside terabit-rate
classical data streams over distances up to 80 km, and Chap-
man et al. [15] distributed two-mode squeezed light via a
coexistence network, a key resource for distributed continuous-
variable quantum systems. Beyond WDM, alternative sepa-
ration techniques have been proposed, including the electro-
optic serrodyne approach of R¨ubeling et al. [16] and the time-
interleaved co-propagation method of Wang et al. [17]; recon-
figurable deployments have also been demonstrated, e.g. the
dynamically switched coexistence network field trial of Wang
et al. [18]. More recently, Thomas et al. [19] demonstrated
quantum state teleportation in a coexistence fiber network car-
rying real internet traffic, and Antesberger et al. [20] proposed
hollow-core fibers (HCFs) to further suppress classical-channel
noise by confining most of the light in air rather than glass,
thereby significantly reducing Raman scattering.

Network tomography. Network tomography has a long
history in classical networks. Coates et al. [21] provided a
comprehensive survey of internet tomography, covering both
delay and loss inference from end-to-end measurements. For
loss tomography, C´aceres et al. [22] developed maximum
likelihood estimators from multicast probes, while for delay
tomography, Lo Presti et al. [23] and Tsang et al. [24]
proposed inference methods for internal delay distributions.
A systematic treatment of identifiability, measurement design,
and network state inference was given by He et al. [7]. More
recently, network tomography has been extended to quantum
networks: De Andrade et al. [25] introduced quantum net-
work tomography (QNT) using multi-party state distribution,
De Andrade et al. [26] further studied the characterization
of quantum flip-star networks, and De Andrade et al. [27]
provided a broader overview of QNT as a principled frame-
work for inferring quantum channel parameters from end-
to-end measurements. Building on these foundations, Wang
et al. [28] studied optimal online probe allocation for both
classical and quantum network tomography, formulating the
task as an online experimental design problem. However,
these QNT works modeled each link by a single scalar noise
parameter under a fixed, static probing configuration—for
instance the quantum flip-star of De Andrade et al. [26], where
every link was an independent bit-flip channel with one flip

probability. The coexistence setting we study is structurally
different in three ways. First, each coexisting fiber carries
three coupled unknowns—the success ratio s and the co-
and counter-propagation depolarization ratios d(1), d(2)—that
compose multiplicatively across a path rather than as a single
additive flip probability. Second, this richer per-link structure
leaves a residual gauge degeneracy that no static end-to-end
probing can resolve (Lemma 3 in §V). Third, we resolve it
with an active reconfiguration—reversing the classical-signal
direction on a single link, which has no analogue in the passive
flip-star—rather than by adding more passive probes. To the
best of our knowledge, network tomography for quantum-
classical coexistence networks, with this direction-dependent
depolarization structure, has not been studied.

II. COEXISTING FIBER MODEL

This section formulates the coexisting fiber channel model
illustrated in Figure 1. We consider a single optical fiber
link shared by a quantum channel and a classical channel
via WDM. The quantum signal occupies one wavelength
while the classical signal occupies another; at the receiver,
a WDM demultiplexer and narrowband filter separate the
two. Despite this spectral separation, noise from the classical
channel—primarily spontaneous Raman scattering—leaks into
the quantum channel and degrades the transmitted quantum
state. Below, we describe each component of the model and
then define the observable quantities and parameters to be
estimated.

A. Physical Background

When a high-power classical signal propagates through
an optical fiber, it generates broadband spontaneous Raman
scattering (SpRS) noise that extends over a wide spectral
range, overlapping with the quantum channel [29], [30]. The
SpRS noise photons are indistinguishable from the quantum
signal photons at the detector, effectively injecting randomly
polarized photons into the quantum channel and decohering
the quantum state. Most of the scattered light nevertheless
occupies broadband optical modes other than the signal mode,
whose ladder operators commute with those of the signal mode
to good approximation; §III uses this to model the Raman
photons as an ancilla system, with their indistinguishability
from signal photons carried by the detector’s measurement
operator rather than by the state space [31]. Crucially, the level
of Raman noise depends on the relative propagation direction
of the classical signal with respect to the quantum signal:
• Co-propagation (⇒): The classical signal travels in the
same direction as the quantum signal. The Raman noise
accumulates along the fiber and is partially attenuated before
reaching the receiver, resulting in a moderate noise-photon
injection rate.
• Counter-propagation (⇐): The classical signal travels in
the opposite direction. The Raman noise generated near the
(quantum) receiver end experiences less attenuation, typically
producing a higher noise-photon injection rate at longer fiber
lengths than co-propagation [13].

3

• No classical signal (×): In the absence of classical traffic,
only intrinsic fiber and system imperfections convert some
photons to depolarized ones, yielding the lowest noise base-
line.

In addition to noise-photon injection, the fiber also attenu-
ates the quantum signal through standard mechanisms—fiber
absorption, scattering, and imperfect coupling at the WDM
multiplexer, filter, and detector—which collectively represent
photon loss.

B. Channel Model

Based on the physical effects described above, we model
each coexisting fiber as a channel with three outcomes for
each input photon, as shown in Figure 1:
1) Photon loss (ratio q): The photon is absorbed or scattered
and never reaches the receiver. This accounts for fiber attenu-
ation, coupling losses, and imperfect filtering.
2) Successful transmission (ratio s): The photon arrives at
the receiver with its polarization state intact, i.e., the quantum
information is preserved.
3) Depolarization (ratio d(x)): Among the input photons,
a fraction d(0) is depolarized by mechanisms that act on
the transmitted photon itself and survive the deterministic
drift correction of §VI-A—residual fast polarization-mode
dispersion, imperfect state preparation and measurement (basis
misalignment and finite extinction), and the residual frame
error left after drift correction;
input-independent detector
dark and accidental counts instead act like a small, classical-
signal-independent injection and are negligible relative to the
signal here. When a classical signal coexists, Raman scattering
injects additional depolarized photons, contributing an extra
fraction d(1) − d(0) under co-propagation and d(2) − d(0)
under counter-propagation, both of which are indistinguish-
able from quantum-signal photons at the receiver. The total
depolarization ratio d(x) therefore depends on the classical-
signal configuration x, with d(0) for no classical signal, d(1)
for co-propagation, and d(2) for counter-propagation.

The success ratio s and photon loss ratio q are intrinsic to
the fiber and do not depend on the classical traffic, whereas
the depolarization ratio d(x) varies across the three scenarios,
with d(0) ⩽ d(1) and d(0) ⩽ d(2) in general. Since the
three outcomes are mutually exclusive and exhaustive, in the
no-classical-signal scenario (x = 0) the channel parameters
satisfy the normalization condition

q + s + d(0) = 1.

(1)

the additional Raman-
Under co- or counter-propagation,
induced photons inflate the received-photon count beyond
the input population, so this normalization no longer holds;
instead,

q + s + d(x) ⩾ 1,

x = 1, 2.

(2)

This population accounting is given a quantum-channel form
in §III, where the coexisting fiber is written as a product—
specifically a tensor product—of two CPTP maps acting on
separate optical modes, rather than as a sum of maps on a

4

Quan.

×
⇒
⇐

fiber attenuation, multiplexing, filter, detector

depolarization

photon loss q

success s

co-prop.

d(0)
d(1)
d(2)

counter-prop.

Raman
Noise

Class.
⇒

loss

modulation/encoding

success

Fig. 1: Model of quantum-classical coexistence fiber. The upper block represents the quantum channel with three possible
outcomes: photon loss (ratio q), successful transmission (ratio s), and depolarization (ratio d(x)). The three rows (separated with
dashed lines) in the upper block correspond to no classical signal (×, depolarization d(0)), co-propagation (⇒, depolarization
d(1)), and counter-propagation (⇐, depolarization d(2)), respectively. The lower block represents the classical channel.

q + s + d(0)

Receive

s + d(x)

Measure

s + d(x)
2

Input T

Receive

Received R

Measure

Outcome M

Fig. 2: Channel parameters (top row) and photon numbers
(bottom row) in the coexisting fiber model. Here x = 0, 1, 2 for
no classical signal, co-propagation, and counter-propagation
depolarization, respectively.

single mode. There the surplus of (2) is carried by a two-mode
photon-number observable, so that the state itself remains
normalized.

C. Observable Quantities

In practice, we do not directly observe the channel param-
eters (q, s, d(x)); instead we measure aggregate photon counts
over many transmissions. Let T ∈ N+ denote the total number
of input photons (each prepared in a fixed state, e.g., |0⟩),
R ∈ N+ the number of received photons, and M ∈ N+
the number of received photons whose measurement outcome
matches the input state (e.g., outcome |0⟩ under the basis
{|0⟩ , |1⟩}). Further details on the experimental setup appear
in §VI-A.

As illustrated in Figure 2, the measurement process proceeds

in two stages:
• Reception. Of the T input photons, (s + d(0))T reach
the receiver via the channel
itself; under co- or counter-
propagation, an additional (d(x) − d(0))T Raman-injected
depolarized photons are also detected, so the total number of
received photons is R = (s+d(x))T . Among these R received
photons, a fraction s/(s + d(x)) are signal photons with their
polarization intact, while the remaining fraction d(x)/(s+d(x))
are depolarized photons with uniformly random polarization.
• Measurement. Each received photon is measured in the
predetermined polarization basis. A successfully transmitted
photon always yields the matched outcome (i.e., the same
polarization as sent), while a depolarized photon yields the
matched outcome with probability 1/2 (since its polarization

is uniformly random). We denote by M the number of photons
that yield the matched outcome.
From these two stages, the expected values of the observables
relate to the channel parameters via

E

(cid:21)

(cid:20) R
T

= s + d(x) =: r(x), E

(cid:21)

(cid:20) M
T

= s +

d(x)
2

.

(3)

We call r(x) := s + d(x) = E[R/T ] the received ratio: the
expected number of received photons per input photon. It
is therefore a per-photon yield rather than a probability, is
consistent with q + s + d(x) ⩾ 1 in (2), and can exceed the
loss-limited baseline 1 − q once Raman photons are injected
(x = 1, 2); for x = 0 it equals 1 − q. (The lowercase r
echoes the received count R.) As we show later, received ratios
compose multiplicatively across concatenated links (Section V
and its general-topology extension in §V-A), which is the basis
of the network estimators. These equations form the basis for
the tomography estimators developed in §IV.

D. Estimation Objective

Data. The experiments of Chapman et al. [32] collect
(T, R, M ) triples for three coexistence scenarios: no classical
signal (T (0), R(0), M (0)), co-propagation (T (1), R(1), M (1)),
and counter-propagation (T (2), R(2), M (2)).

Depolarization channel and probability. If we focus on
the quantum state of the received photons (post-selection),
each coexisting fiber can be modeled as one of three depolar-
izing channels, indexed by x. It is often convenient to express
the depolarization in terms of the depolarization probability
p(x) ∈ [0, 1], defined as the conditional probability that a
received photon is a depolarized noise photon rather than a
successfully transmitted signal photon:

p(x) :=

d(x)
s + d(x)

=

d(x)
r(x)

,

x = 0, 1, 2.

(4)

A larger p(x) indicates a noisier channel with greater quantum-
state degradation; equivalently, a fraction s/r(x) = 1 − p(x) of
the received photons carry intact polarization.

Objective. Our goal is to estimate the channel parameters
s, q, d(0), d(1), d(2) (with q = 1 − s − d(0), and consequently

the depolarization probabilities p(0), p(1), p(2)) of a coexisting
fiber from the observed photon counts across the three scenar-
ios.

III. QUANTUM-CHANNEL MODEL FOR THE COEXISTING
FIBER

In this section we recast

the coexisting-fiber model of
Section II as a quantum channel. The fiber acts on a two-
mode space: the signal mode, together with the broadband
mode into which the classical signal scatters Raman photons.
On that space we model it as the tensor product E = E1 ⊗ E2
of a depolarizing-with-loss signal channel and a Raman-noise-
injection channel, and we show that the link observables R/T
and M/T reduce exactly to the basic-model parameters of §II.
The two-mode split is itself an approximation, made precise
below. It does not discard the indistinguishability of the Raman
and signal photons, which the detector’s measurement operator
retains.

A. Channel Model Formulation

a) Mode structure: Spontaneous Raman scattering does
not act exclusively on the signal mode. The classical pump
scatters photons into a broad continuum of optical modes,
and the receiver’s filter admits those that overlap the signal
band [29], [31]. We collect the admitted photons into a single
ancilla mode S2, held distinct from the signal mode S1. Treat-
ing S2 as a system separate from S1 requires the two modes to
be independent degrees of freedom: formally, that the creation
and annihilation (ladder) operators of one commute with those
of the other, which holds exactly when the two mode profiles
are orthogonal [31]. Here this is an approximation, since the
scattering continuum is not exactly orthogonal to the signal
mode. Their residual overlap η sets its accuracy: the ladder
operators commute up to η, and equivalently one may take
the modes orthogonal by construction and neglect the O(η)
fraction of Raman photons scattered into the signal mode
itself. The receiver’s mode selectivity keeps this small, since
the signal occupies one narrow spatiotemporal mode inside
a much broader filter passband, so η ≪ 1. We accordingly
work on the two-mode space S1 ⊗ S2, where S1 carries
the transmitted signal and the ancilla S2 carries the Raman
photons admitted by the filter.

b) Where indistinguishability enters: Separating the
modes is not a claim that the two photon species can be
told apart. Raman photons inside the filter passband remain
operationally indistinguishable from signal photons: nothing
in the experiment resolves which of S1, S2 a detected photon
indistinguishability in
came from. We therefore carry that
the measurement operator rather than in the state space. We
model the detector by the mode-symmetric two-mode photon-
number observable ˆN of (9) below. It carries no mode label
and so cannot distinguish the two contributions; S1 and S2
are internal bookkeeping that the measurement erases. Placing
indistinguishability at the detector is what makes the tensor-
product form (8) available: because the detector sums over the
two modes, the channel may factorize across modes it never
has to identify.

5

Each mode is truncated to at most one photon: we write
H = span{|Ω⟩ , |0⟩ , |1⟩}, where the vacuum |Ω⟩ records the
absence of a photon and {|0⟩ , |1⟩} spans the polarization
qubit. Writing I = |0⟩ ⟨0| + |1⟩ ⟨1| for the qubit identity, I/2
is the maximally mixed (fully depolarized) qubit. We adopt
the standard weak-injection assumption and drop higher-order
photon-number states: spontaneous Raman scattering into the
filtered mode overlapping the signal is weak enough that multi-
photon terms contribute negligibly [13], [30]. At the photon-
count level at which R and M are defined in §II, the two
link observables below then depend on E2 only through the
probability that it injects a photon into S2.

c) Signal channel: The channel E1 acts on the input
photon ρin in S1: it transmits the photon intact with probability
s, depolarizes it with the intrinsic probability d(0), and loses
it with probability 1 − s − d(0),
E1(ρ) = s ρ + d(0) I
2

+ (1 − s − d(0)) |Ω⟩ ⟨Ω| .

(5)

With s, d(0) ⩾ 0 and the normalization q + s + d(0) = 1 of (1),
the weights sum to one, so E1 is trace-preserving and hence a
genuine CPTP channel on S1.

d) Raman-noise-injection channel: The channel E2 acts
on the ancilla S2 and captures the crosstalk of the coexisting
classical signal. It is the depolarizing channel of strength
d(x) − d(0),

E2(ρ) = (d(x) − d(0))

I
2

+ (cid:0)1 − (d(x) − d(0))(cid:1)ρ.

(6)

Being a convex combination of the completely depolarizing
map ρ (cid:55)→ Tr[ρ]I/2 and the identity, E2 is CPTP whenever
0 ⩽ d(x) − d(0) ⩽ 1. Unlike a replacement map, it acts on its
argument, so it remains well defined on an arbitrary ancilla
state. Here the ancilla is prepared in vacuum, ρvac = |Ω⟩ ⟨Ω|,
and

E2(ρvac) = (d(x) − d(0))

I
2

+ (cid:0)1 − (d(x) − d(0))(cid:1) |Ω⟩ ⟨Ω| : (7)

a randomly polarized photon is injected with probability
d(x) − d(0), and otherwise the mode stays empty. The map
takes vacuum to a one-photon state because the classical
pump supplying the scattered photon is treated as an external
classical drive rather than as part of the quantum system;
photon number therefore need not be conserved on S1 ⊗ S2
alone.

e) The coexisting fiber: Both processes occur on the
same fiber and are registered by the same detector. Because
that detector, rather than the state space, carries their indistin-
guishability, the two may be assigned to separate factors, and
the link channel is their tensor product rather than a sum,

E = E1 ⊗ E2,

E(ρin ⊗ ρvac) = E1(ρin) ⊗ E2(ρvac).

(8)

A tensor product of CPTP maps is CPTP, so E is a quantum
channel and Tr[E(ρin ⊗ ρvac)] = 1. The state therefore stays
normalized, as the measurement postulate requires, and the
excess photons that coexistence delivers are carried instead by
the photon-number observable, as we show next.

6

B. Reduction to the Basic Model

The basic model of §II estimates s and d(x) from the
observables R/T and M/T in (3). We now recover those
observables directly from the channel E. As set out above,
the detector cannot tell which mode a photon arrived in, so it
counts the two-mode photon-number observable

ˆN = Π ⊗ IH + IH ⊗ Π,

Π = |0⟩ ⟨0| + |1⟩ ⟨1| = I,

(9)
where Π projects onto the one-photon subspace of a mode
and is orthogonal to the vacuum, and IH is the identity on the
full single-mode space H. The two differ on the vacuum: IH
retains it, whereas Π = I annihilates it, which is what keeps
an undetected photon from being counted in (10). Because E
factorizes, so does the expectation, and the expected number
of received photons per input photon is

E

(cid:21)

(cid:20) R
T

= Tr12

= Tr1

(cid:2) ˆN E(ρin ⊗ ρvac)(cid:3)
(cid:2)ΠE1(ρin)(cid:3) Tr2
+ Tr1

(cid:2)E1(ρin)(cid:3) Tr2

(cid:2)E2(ρvac)(cid:3)

(cid:2)ΠE2(ρvac)(cid:3)

= (cid:0)s + d(0)(cid:1) · 1 + 1 · (cid:0)d(x) − d(0)(cid:1) = s + d(x),

(10)

where the two middle factors are unity because E1 and E2
are trace-preserving. Replacing Π by the matched-outcome
projector |ψin⟩ ⟨ψin| in both slots (retaining, in either mode,
only the photons whose measured polarization matches the
prepared state) gives
(cid:21)
= ⟨ψin| E1(ρin) |ψin⟩ + ⟨ψin| E2(ρvac) |ψin⟩

E

(cid:20) M
T

(cid:16)

=

s +

(cid:17)

d(0)
2

+

d(x) − d(0)
2

= s +

d(x)
2

,

(11)

since a depolarized photon (I/2) matches with probability
1/2 and the vacuum never clicks. These are exactly the link
observables of (3), with the received ratio r(x) = s + d(x) =
E[R/T ]. The received ratio is thus the expectation of ˆN ,
whose spectrum is {0, 1, 2}, and not a probability. It may
therefore exceed the loss-limited baseline 1−q, consistent with
q + s + d(x) ⩾ 1 in (2), while the state itself stays normalized,
Tr[E(ρin ⊗ ρvac)] = 1. The link estimators of §IV therefore
estimate the physical parameters of this channel directly.

Beyond reproducing the basic-model observables, the chan-
nel form makes the per-link figure of merit explicit. Since
ˆN has spectrum {0, 1, 2}, a reception event need not be a
single photon. The signal mode delivers one with probability
1 − q = s + d(0) and, independently, E2 injects one with
probability d(x) − d(0), so both fire together with probability
(1 − q)(d(x) − d(0)). The polarization state of the surviving
photon is then

exhausted the outcome space. Setting the higher order term
aside, E conditioned on a received photon acts as a single-qubit
depolarizing channel with depolarization probability p(x) =
d(x)/(s + d(x)) of §II, whose process (entanglement) fidelity
with the identity is F (x) = 1 − 3
4 p(x). This is the quantity we
compare against Bayesian process tomography in §VI (Fig. 6).
The depolarizing fixed point I/2 also makes the received
ratios r(x) compose multiplicatively across concatenated links
in §V–§V-A.

C. Physical Interpretation of d(x)

The Raman excess d(x) − d(0) that weights the injection
channel E2 in (6) grows with the classical-signal power P and
the fiber length L, and depends on the relative propagation
direction x. Writing d(x) = d(0) + d(x)
Raman(P, L), a first-
order accumulation model gives, up to a direction-dependent
prefactor,

d(1)
Raman ∝ P

d(2)
Raman ∝ P

(cid:90) L

0
(cid:90) L

0

e−γQ(L−z)e−γC z dz,

e−γQze−γC z dz,

(13)

(14)

for co-propagation (x = 1) and counter-propagation (x =
2), with γQ, γC the quantum- and classical-band attenuation
coefficients [13], [29], [30]. These integrals reproduce the
qualitative power- and length-scaling of the injected noise.
Attenuation alone, however, does not account for the magni-
tude of the co/counter asymmetry. That asymmetry is instead
dominated by the direction-dependent spontaneous-Raman
scattering and capture coefficients. We therefore treat d(1) and
d(2) as empirical per-link, per-direction parameters, estimated
directly by the tomography of §IV rather than predicted from
first principles.

IV. COEXISTING QUANTUM LINK TOMOGRAPHY

In this section, we present the quantum link tomography
(QLT) method for estimating the parameters of a single
coexisting fiber channel (Figure 3a). Specifically, we estimate
the success ratio s and the depolarization ratios d(0), d(1), d(2)
corresponding to the three coexistence scenarios (no classical
signal, co-propagation, and counter-propagation).

From the channel model in (3), the observable ratios satisfy

the system




,

x = 0, 1, 2,

s + d(x) =

R(x)
T (x)
M (x)
T (x)
Subtracting the two equations within each scenario and rear-
ranging yields closed-form estimators for all parameters:

x = 0, 1, 2.

d(x)
2

(15)

s +



=

,

s ρin + d(x) I/2 +

coincidences (N ⩾2)
(cid:123)
(cid:125)(cid:124)
(cid:122)
O(cid:0)(1 − q)(d(x) − d(0))(cid:1)

s + d(x)
where the braced remainder is of the order of that discarded
coincidence weight (i.e., receive two or more photons), left
over because the three single-click weights are used as if they

,

(12)




ˆd(x) =

2(R(x) − M (x))
T (x)


ˆs

=

1
3

(cid:80)2

x=0

2M (x) − R(x)
T (x)

,

x = 0, 1, 2,

(16)

,

where each ˆd(x) follows directly from the difference between
the received count R(x) and the matched-outcome count M (x),

Quantum (⇐)

Classical

Quantum (⇒)

(a) Single link tomography
2

7

A. Statistical Properties

The estimators in (16) are not merely algebraic inversions:
they are unbiased method-of-moments estimators with closed-
form variances. Under the binomial statistics implied by §II—
for each scenario x,
the intact (signal) photons and the
depolarized photons (intrinsic plus Raman-injected) form two
independent binomial populations over the T inputs, Rs ∼
Binom(T, s) and Rd ∼ Binom(T, d(x)), with R = Rs + Rd
and M = Rs + Binom(Rd, 1
2 ) (so R may exceed T under
Raman injection)—moment matching gives E[ ˆd(x)] = d(x) and
E[ˆs] = s for any fixed T , with

Var( ˆd(x)) =

d(x)(2 − d(x))
T (x)

,

Var(ˆs(x)) =

s(1 − s) + d(x)
T (x)

,

(17)
where ˆs(x) is the single-scenario success estimate defined
above; averaging the three independent equal-T scenarios
yields Var(ˆs) = [3s(1 − s) + (cid:80)
x d(x)]/(9T ). All estimators
T -consistent, and the depolarization probability
are therefore
ˆp(x) = ˆd(x)/(ˆs + ˆd(x)) inherits an O(1/
T ) standard error
by the delta method. These closed forms match Monte-Carlo
simulation and provide the ±standard-error bands against
which the QLT-versus-BPT agreement of §VI should be read.

√

√

V. COEXISTING QUANTUM NETWORK TOMOGRAPHY

We now turn to the network tomography setting [7], in
which a quantum network has multiple nodes and links and we
aim to estimate the parameters of each link from end-to-end
probes. In this section, we focus on the network tomography
method for a star network; an extension to general multi-node,
multi-link topologies is presented in §V-A below and validated
by simulation in §VI-D.

k

We take the star network in Figure 3b as a running example.
The network has three links connecting a central hub node
to three end nodes; each link k has its own parameters sk
and d(x)
for k ∈ {1, 2, 3} and x ∈ {0, 1, 2}. Because every
network probe is sent while the classical traffic is present,
each hop is always under coexistence, so only x ∈ {1, 2}
(co- or counter-propagation) appears in the network estimators
below; the no-classical-signal case x = 0 enters only in single-
link tomography (§IV). We assume a steady classical signal
flow (blue thick arrows) from the bottom-left end node to
the central node, where it bifurcates toward the other two
end nodes. To estimate per-link parameters, we perform end-
to-end quantum measurements between each ordered pair of
end nodes (illustrated by the surrounding thinner arrows in
Figure 3b) and then solve a system of equations relating these
measurements to the link parameters. We describe the method
formally below.

Consider a probe sent from end node k, through a coexisting
fiber, to the central hub node, which then forwards the received
quantum signal through another coexisting fiber to a different
end node ℓ (with k, ℓ ∈ {1, 2, 3} and k ̸= ℓ). Let Tk,ℓ denote
the total number of input photons, Rk,ℓ the number received at
node ℓ, and Mk,ℓ the number that yield matched measurement
outcomes. Since the quantum signal traverses two hops—first
link k (from node k to the hub) and then link ℓ (from the hub to
node ℓ)—the coexistence scenario (co- or counter-propagation)

1

3

(b) Star network tomography

Fig. 3: Link and network tomography illustrations. Blue thick
arrows represent classical signals, and other thinner arrows
represent quantum signals. In Figure 3a, the quantum and clas-
sical signals share a single fiber link via WDM. In Figure 3b,
a star-topology network carries two or more classical signals
on different wavelengths (from the bottom left node) into the
center node, where wavelength switching routes each classical
signal to a separate output fiber.

and ˆs combines the three per-scenario success estimates to
reduce measurement noise. Explicitly, each scenario supplies
its own unbiased estimate ˆs(x) := (2M (x) − R(x))/T (x) of the
same s, and ˆs = (cid:80)2
x=0 wxˆs(x) with (cid:80)
x wx = 1; (16) uses the
equal weights wx = 1/3. The three scenarios are independent
runs, so by (17) below the minimum-variance choice would
be wx ∝ T (x)/[s(1 − s) + d(x)], which reduces to 1/3 exactly
when that ratio is constant in x; we keep equal weights because
the optimal ones depend on the parameters being estimated.
The photon-loss ratio then follows from the normalization
in (1), ˆq = 1− ˆs− ˆd(0), completing the closed-form estimate of
all link parameters (ˆs, ˆq, ˆd(0), ˆd(1), ˆd(2)). From these estimates,
the depolarization probabilities are ˆp(x) = ˆd(x)/(ˆs + ˆd(x)) for
x = 0, 1, 2.

Remark 1. The estimators in (16) assume that data from
all three scenarios—including the no-classical-signal baseline
(T (0), R(0), M (0))—are available. If only the two coexistence
scenarios are measured, the same form applies with ˆd(x) =
2(R(x) − M (x))/T (x) for x = 1, 2 and ˆs = 1
x=1(2M (x) −
2
R(x))/T (x). In this two-scenario case the loss ratio ˆq is not
identifiable, as it requires the x = 0 baseline ˆd(0).

(cid:80)2

8

on each link depends on the direction of its classical signal
relative to the quantum signal. To make this dependence
explicit, we define an indicator x(e, i) ∈ {1, 2}, where e is
the link index and i is the quantum-signal direction: i = 1
for end-to-hub and i = 2 for hub-to-end; x(e, i) = 1 denotes
co-propagation and x(e, i) = 2 denotes counter-propagation.
For example, x(k, 1) = 1 means that on link k the end-to-
hub quantum signal is co-propagating with the classical signal,
while x(k, 2) = 2 means that on the same link the hub-to-end
quantum signal is counter-propagating. With this notation, the
first hop uses x(k, 1) and the second hop uses x(ℓ, 2).

Following the procedure in Figure 2, and writing r(x)

:=
sk + d(x)
for the received ratio of link k under scenario x
k
(the per-link instance of (3)), the parameters of the two links
involved (those incident to nodes k and ℓ) satisfy, for k, ℓ ∈
{1, 2, 3} and k ̸= ℓ,

k

e = se + d(x)

to the coexistence setting is the direction-dependent received
ratio r(x)
and the resulting depolarization-gauge
degeneracy in (18), which has no classical loss-tomography
counterpart and motivates the single-link classical-flip strategy
below.

e

e

Physically,

that degeneracy is the following. Each link
contributes two unknowns to (18)—the ratio a probe sees
travelling end-to-hub, r(x(e,1))
, and the one it sees travelling
hub-to-end, r(x(e,2))
—and every probe traverses exactly one
e
link in each direction. Scaling all three end-to-hub ratios by
λ > 0 and all three hub-to-end ratios by 1/λ therefore leaves
all six products unchanged, so static probing determines the
products r(1)
but not the ratios r(1)
that separate
co- from counter-propagation. Reversing the classical signal
on one link is the Z2 operation on x(e, i) that breaks this
symmetry; Lemma 3 makes it precise.

e /r(2)

e r(2)
e

e






r(x(k,1))
k

r(x(ℓ,2))
ℓ

=

(cid:32)
sℓ+

sk

(cid:33)
d(x(ℓ,2))
ℓ
2

+d(x(k,1))
k

sℓ+d(x(ℓ,2))
ℓ
2

=

Rk,ℓ
Tk,ℓ

Mk,ℓ
Tk,ℓ

(18)

(19)

Although (18) also produces six equations (one per ordered
pair), only five are independent, so this group alone does not
determine all six unknowns {d(x)
: k ∈ {1, 2, 3}, x ∈ {1, 2}}.
k
We make this precise, together with its resolution, after stating
the assumption that the flip relies on.

The first equation, (18), accounts for all photons reaching node
ℓ (those successfully transmitted plus those injected by Raman
noise on either link): it is the product of the two per-link
received ratios, the two-link instance of a multiplicative law
that we generalize to arbitrary paths in Proposition 4. The
second equation accounts for the photons that yield matched
measurement outcomes: the term sk(sℓ + d(x(ℓ,2))
/2) corre-
sponds to photons successfully transmitted on link k and then
either successfully transmitted on link ℓ (sksℓ, all matched)
or depolarized on link ℓ (skd(x(ℓ,2))
/2, only half matched);
ℓ
the term d(x(k,1))
(sℓ + d(x(ℓ,2))
)/2 corresponds to depolarized
ℓ
photons emerging from link k that then traverse link ℓ—all of
which are depolarized, so only half yield matched outcomes.
Rearranging, we obtain, for k, ℓ ∈ {1, 2, 3} and k ̸= ℓ,

k

ℓ

sksℓ =

2Mk,ℓ − Rk,ℓ
Tk,ℓ

.

(20)

The six instances of (20) (one per ordered pair k ̸= ℓ) involve
only the success ratios {sk}; we can therefore solve for them
independently as

(cid:115)

ˆsk :=

Qk,ℓQk,m
Qℓ,m

,

(21)

distinct k, ℓ, m ∈
for
(2Mk,ℓ−Rk,ℓ)+(2Mℓ,k−Rℓ,k)
2Tk,ℓ

:=
symmetrizes over the two probe
directions between nodes k and ℓ (assuming Tk,ℓ = Tℓ,k for
simplicity).

{1, 2, 3}, where Qk,ℓ

through both hops. By (20),

The quantity 2Mk,ℓ − Rk,ℓ isolates the photons that survive
polarization-intact
the intact
population, sksℓ, composes multiplicatively—exactly as per-
link pass-probabilities do in classical multicast loss tomog-
raphy [22]. The success-ratio estimator (21) is therefore the
quantum analogue of the classical tree loss estimator, with se
playing the role of a link pass-probability, which lets us inherit
its identifiability and sample-complexity results. What is new

Assumption 2 (Flip invariance). Reversing the classical-
signal direction on a link changes which propagation mode
(co- vs. counter-) a given quantum probe encounters, but
leaves the two per-link depolarization ratios d(1)
un-
changed in value. Equivalently, the flip interchanges x(e, 1) ↔
x(e, 2) without introducing new unknowns, so the reversed-
direction batch reuses the same six unknowns {d(x)

e , d(2)
e

k }.

e

e = r(x)

Lemma 3 (Gauge degeneracy and gauge fixing). Taking
logarithms of the six instances of (18) gives a linear system
Au = b in the six log-received-ratios ue,x = log r(x)
,
with A the 6 × 6 probe-by-unknown incidence matrix and
bk,ℓ = log(Rk,ℓ/Tk,ℓ). Then rank A = 5 and ker A =
span{v}, where v assigns +1 to each link’s end-to-hub
received ratio and −1 to its hub-to-end one. Consequently
u—and hence d(x)
e − se, with {se} already fixed
by (21)—is determined only up to the gauge orbit u + tv.
Under Assumption 2, reversing the classical-signal direction
on a single link supplies one further probe equation, i.e. a row
F with F v ̸= 0; appending it fixes the gauge, giving a stacked
system of full column rank 6 with a unique solution. Flipping
any single link suffices. Note that F is a measured row, not
an arbitrary constraint, so it selects the physical point of the
orbit rather than a conventional one.
2 , r(1)
1 , r(1)
Proof. In the ordering (r(1)
3 ), the in-
cidence matrix of the six ordered pairs in (22) has rank 5
with null space spanned by v = (+1, −1, −1, +1, −1, +1)
(each row sums two entries of v with opposite signs, so
Av = 0). Stacking any single flipped-link batch adds a row
not orthogonal to v, removing the null direction and giving
rank 6; the unique solution then follows by back-substitution,
e.g. r(1)
(R1,2/T1,2)(R′
the flipped-link measurement.

1,3/T1,3)/(R3,2/T3,2) with R′

1 , r(2)

3 , r(2)

2 , r(2)

1 =

(cid:113)

1,3

To fix the gauge we therefore flip the direction of the classi-
cal signal on one link—say link 3—so that the mapping on that

link is swapped between the two probe directions (i.e., x(3, 1)
and x(3, 2) are interchanged). This yields a second batch of
measurements, from which we obtain a complementary set
of equations (23). Putting the original and alternative groups
together gives










3

3

2

2

1

1

1 r(1)
r(1)
r(1)
1 r(1)
r(2)
2 r(2)
2 r(1)
r(2)
r(2)
3 r(2)
3 r(1)
r(2)
1 r(1)
r(1)
r(1)
1 r(2)
r(2)
2 r(2)
2 r(2)
r(2)
r(1)
3 r(2)
3 r(1)
r(1)

2

1

3

3

1

2

= R1,2
T1,2
= R1,3
T1,3
= R2,1
T2,1
= R2,3
T2,3
= R3,1
T3,1
= R3,2
T3,2
= R1,2
T1,2
= R1,3
T1,3
= R2,1
T2,1
= R2,3
T2,3
= R3,1
T3,1
= R3,2
T3,2

,

.

(22)

(23)

Combining (21), (22), and (23) yields estimators for all per-

link parameters of the star network.

We note that flipping the classical-signal direction on a
single link is the asymmetry that breaks this degeneracy. Cru-
cially, this flip is power-preserving under mild and commonly
satisfied conditions: the Raman-induced depolarization that
a probe accumulates scales with the time-averaged classical
power rather than with the data payload, since the injected
noise photons integrate over a detection window vastly longer
than a classical symbol period [13], [30]. Whenever the classi-
cal launch power is held at a fixed target—for instance a strong
carrier on which the modulation is a small perturbation, a
constant-envelope (phase- or polarization-) modulation format,
or an amplifier output clamped by automatic power control—
reversing the propagation direction on a link leaves d(1)
and d(2) unchanged in magnitude and merely interchanges
which one a given probe sees. The single-link flip therefore
reuses exactly the same per-link unknowns. Such a reversal
is practical in several deployments—bidirectional links with
matched transceivers, a dedicated fixed-power pilot tone, or
software-defined/ROADM networks where the control plane
reroutes an individual channel per link—and in a star it
is a local operation between the hub and one end node,
performed during a scheduled maintenance window rather than
a network-wide reconfiguration.

Assumption 2 can moreover be relaxed. Suppose the re-
versed batch perturbs the flipped link’s depolarization to
d(x)
3 → d(x)
3 (1 + εx) through a launch-power or transceiver
mismatch. Because the success-ratio estimator (21) uses only
2M − R = T (cid:81)
k sk, it is independent of d(x) and hence
unbiased to all orders in ε; the mismatch enters only the
depolarization recovery, where the flipped entries of (23) carry
a relative bias of order εx p(x)
that vanishes as εx → 0.
3
Here p(x)
is link 3’s depolarization probability

3 = d(x)

3 /r(x)

3

of §II, not a received ratio: the perturbation moves r(x)
3 + εxd(x)
r(x)

3 , a relative change of εxp(x)
3 .

3

A. Extension to General Topologies

9

to

e

= se + d(xe)

While the preceding development in this section focused
on the star network, the multiplicative nature of the success
ratio se and the received ratio r(xe)
(defined
in Section II) allows for an extension to general topologies.
In a general network, an end-to-end quantum probe traverses
a path P consisting of a sequence of coexisting fiber links.
Based on the model in Section II, the following proposition
expresses the end-to-end observables of such a path in terms of
the per-link parameters, generalizing the two-link star-network
relations (18)–(20).

e

Proposition 4. Consider an end-to-end quantum probe that
traverses a path P of coexisting fiber links, where each link
e ∈ P has success ratio se and depolarization ratio d(xe)
, with
xe ∈ {1, 2} denoting the coexistence scenario (co- or counter-
propagation) encountered on link e. Let TP , RP , and MP
denote the numbers of input, received, and matched-outcome
photons of the probe, respectively. Then the expected end-to-
end observables satisfy

e

RP
TP

2MP − RP
TP

=

=

(cid:89)

e∈P
(cid:89)

e∈P

(se + d(xe)

e

) =:

r(xe)
e

,

(24)

(cid:89)

e∈P

se.

(25)

(xej )
ej

Proof. We generalize the two-link composition (18)–(20) to an
n-link path by tracking how the received-photon population
splits according to polarization. Order the path as P =
(e1, . . . , en), with the probe entering e1 first and exiting en
last, and abbreviate sj := sej , dj := d
, and rj := sj + dj
for the success, depolarization, and received ratios of the j-
th link. Split the population surviving the first j links into
two disjoint groups. Let Ij be the expected number that are
polarization-intact, i.e. successfully transmitted by every one
of those j links, so the encoded state is preserved. Let Dj
be the expected number that are depolarized, with uniformly
random polarization—either signal photons depolarized along
the way or Raman photons injected by the classical signal.
Every input photon starts intact, so I0 = TP and D0 = 0.
Because an intact photon always yields the matched outcome
whereas a depolarized one does so with probability 1
2 (cf. the
single-link rule (3)), the received and matched counts after j
links are

R(j) = Ij +Dj, M (j) = Ij + 1

2 Dj =⇒ 2M (j) −R(j) = Ij.
(26)
That is, 2M − R counts exactly the photons that survive intact
through all j links.

Adding an additional link ej results in population changes
analogous to those of the single-link channel of §II. An intact
photon stays intact only when it is successfully transmitted
(ratio sj); otherwise it is depolarized (intrinsic fraction d(0)
) or
joined by a freshly injected Raman photon (fraction dj −d(0)
),
and the two together contribute dj Ij−1 depolarized photons.

j

j

10

An already-depolarized photon, by contrast, can never recover
its polarization: it survives depolarized with probability sj +
d(0)
, and the Raman photons scattered from the classical signal
j
make up the remainder. The depolarized stream is therefore
scaled by exactly rj = sj + dj, a population factor rather
than the survival probability of a single photon. This gives the
linear recursion

Ij = sj Ij−1,

Dj = dj Ij−1 + rj Dj−1.

(27)

For n = 2 this reproduces the two-link relations exactly: M2 =
I2 + 1
2 D2 recovers (19), while R2 = I2 +D2 = (s1 +d1)(s2 +
d2) TP recovers (18).

The intact branch of (27) is decoupled and telescopes im-
mediately to In = (cid:0) (cid:81)n
e∈P se. Substituting
this into the identity (26) at the end of the path (j = n) yields

(cid:1)I0 = TP

j=1 sj

(cid:81)

2MP − RP
TP

=

In
TP

=

(cid:89)

e∈P

se,

which is (25); the two-link estimator (20) is the special case
n = 2. Likewise, summing the two parts of (27) gives R(j) =
(cid:1) = rjR(j−1), so the received count
(cid:0)Ij−1 +Dj−1
Ij +Dj = rj
is multiplicative as well,

RP = R(n) =

(cid:16) n
(cid:89)

(cid:17)

rj

j=1

TP = TP

(cid:0)se + d(xe)

e

(cid:1),

(cid:89)

e∈P

which is (24).

j

Remark 5 (Injection convention). With νj := dj − d(0)
the
Raman excess, the recursion (27) adds νjR(j−1) at link j:
injected photons are proportional to the population arriving
there. This matches the per-link calibration, in which νj is an
excess per received photon, and is what the emulation of §VI-C
generates. Spontaneous Raman is pumped by the classical
signal alone, however, so a deployed path would attenuate
link j’s injection only downstream, giving RP /TP = (cid:81)
j tj +
(cid:80)
. The two agree when
one link dominates the injection or the per-hop transmittances
approach unity. We keep the multiplicative form, under which
the estimators below are derived and validated.

k>j tk with tj := sj + d(0)

j νj

(cid:81)

j

a) Relation to prior work and novelty: The recursive
peeling/promotion machinery we use below for trees, and
the path-decomposition idea for meshes, are the progressive-
etching procedure of our prior work [12], developed there for
bit-/phase-flip channels with SPAM errors; we do not claim
that recursion as new. The contribution of this section is what
makes that machinery applicable to coexistence channels:
(i) Proposition 4, which shows that the coexistence observables
RP /TP and (2MP − RP )/TP compose multiplicatively along
a path even though Raman injection makes the received ratio
r(xe)
a per-photon yield rather than a survival probability
e
(§III)—a property absent from the additive flip-channel ob-
servables of [12]; and (ii) the direction-dependent unknowns
d(1)
e , d(2)
e , resolved by the single-link classical-flip protocol of
§V, which have no analogue there.

1) Peeling Algorithm for Tree Topologies:

e , d(2)

a) Notation: The network is an undirected graph in
which each link e = {u, v} is one coexisting fiber with
parameters se and d(1)
e . Here it is a tree T = (V, E):
connected and acyclic, so |E| = |V | − 1 and any two nodes
are joined by a unique path, whose link set we write P (i, j).
A leaf has degree one, a leaf link is incident to a leaf, and
monitors (set M, initially the leaves) are the nodes where
probes are prepared and measured. We use the calligraphic
T for the tree to avoid a collision with the launched-photon
count T of §II.

By a probe ratio we mean one of the two end-to-end path
observables of Proposition 4, formed from the counts of probes
exchanged between monitors i and j and, as in §V, averaged
over the two probe directions:

Qi,j := 1
2

(cid:0)Q→

i,j + Q→
j,i

(cid:1) (25)=

(cid:89)

se,

(28)

Gi,j := (cid:112)Λi,j Λj,i

(24)=

e∈P (i,j)

(cid:89)

ge,

e∈P (i,j)

(29)

(cid:113)

where Q→

i,j := (2Mi,j − Ri,j)/Ti,j and Λi,j := Ri,j/Ti,j are

e r(2)
r(1)

the one-directional forms and ge :=
e . We call Qi,j
the success probe ratio and Gi,j the received probe ratio; these
are the only two path quantities the estimators below consume.
Averaging is optional for Q, whose factors se do not depend
on the propagation mode, but necessary for the received side:
reversing the probe direction reverses the mode on every link,
e r(2)
so Λi,jΛj,i contributes r(1)
per link and Gi,j alone is
e
multiplicative in a direction-independent quantity. Note that
ge is the gauge-invariant combination of Lemma 3.

Building on the path observables of Proposition 4,
the
peeling estimator reuses the leaf-link-then-promote schedule
of the progressive-etching procedure [12],
instantiated on
the multiplicative success- and received-ratio observables of
coexisting links. For tree-structured networks, we can employ
a “peeling” algorithm to identify all per-link parameters using
probes between leaf nodes. A link e incident to a leaf node v
can be isolated by considering paths to two other leaf nodes j
and k located in different subtrees relative to v’s parent. Let
Qv,j, Qv,k, and Qj,k be the end-to-end success ratios for the
respective paths. Then, the success ratio of the leaf link e is
given by

(cid:115)

ˆse =

Qv,jQv,k
Qj,k

,

(30)

which is identical in form to the star-network estimator in (21).
Once ˆse is determined, its effect can be “peeled off” from other
paths containing e, allowing for the recursive estimation of in-
ternal link parameters. The identical construction on the sym-
metrized received probe ratios returns ˆge = (cid:112)Gv,jGv,k/Gj,k.
(The unsymmetrized Λi,j cannot be used here:
the mode
indices on the shared sub-paths of v → j and j → k are
then opposite and fail to cancel.) This recursive procedure—
identify a current leaf link, peel it off, and promote its far
endpoint to a monitor so that interior links in turn become
leaf links—is summarized in Algorithm 1 and illustrated on
a five-link tree in Fig. 4. Two preconditions make each step
well defined. First, the chosen leaf link must be branching: its

interior endpoint u must have two further monitors in distinct
components of T \ {u}, so that the paths v → j and v → k
traverse e and diverge at u while j → k avoids e; this is
exactly the condition under which (cid:112)Qv,jQv,k/Qj,k = se.
Any tree with at least three leaves contains such a link, and
peeling preserves the property—removing e and promoting
u keeps the residual graph a tree with the promoted node
available as a required monitor—so the loop terminates after
|E| peels. (A pure degree-two chain, in which no interior
node branches, is the lone exception and falls back to the
log-linear least-squares formulation described below.) Second,
every Q entering the square root must be strictly positive,
which holds once the sample size is large enough that the
empirical Q = (2M − R)/T stays positive.

e

2 log(cid:0)r(1)

(cid:1), so that log r(1,2)

b) Separating the two propagation modes: Symmetriza-
tion is deliberately lossy: it discards the direction asymmetry
Λi,j/Λj,i, which is exactly what distinguishes r(1)
from r(2)
e .
e
e /r(2)
Writing δe := 1
= log ge ±δe,
e
each probe contributes a signed row in the δe whose signs are
fixed by the modes it meets; one traffic configuration therefore
leaves only the kernel of the resulting matrix A1 undetermined
(one dimensional for the three-link star, matching Lemma 3).
A second round reversing the classical signal on a known
subset S ⊆ E contributes further rows AS, and the d(x)
are
identifiable if and only if the stacked matrix [A1; AS] has full
column rank |E|—which the single-link flip of §V achieves
on the star. Being signed and supported only on S, this system
admits no leaf-link cancellation, so we solve it by least squares
rather than by peeling.

e

2) General Graphs and Path Selection: For general mesh
topologies, the estimation problem can be transformed into a
system of linear equations by taking the logarithm of the path
observables in Proposition 4 (Eqs. (24) and (25)). For instance,
for the success ratios, we have

(cid:88)

e∈P

log se = log

(cid:18) 2MP − RP
TP

(cid:19)

.

(31)

This is precisely the log-additive linear system of classical loss
tomography [22], here applied to the intact-photon success ra-
tios se rather than to classical packet pass-probabilities. Given
a sufficient set of independent paths {P }, this system can be
solved using standard linear regression or maximum likelihood
techniques. To resolve the direction-dependent depolarization
parameters d(1)
e , one can perform multiple mea-
e
surement rounds with different classical signal configurations,
ensuring that each link is probed in both co- and counter-
propagation modes.

and d(2)

The condition for this system to be solvable is exactly the

classical route-identifiability condition [7].

Proposition 6 (Identifiability). Fix a probe set P and let A ∈
{0, 1}|P|×|E| be the path-by-link incidence matrix with AP,e =
1 iff e ∈ P . The per-link log-success-ratios {log se}e∈E (resp.
the log-received-ratios {log r(x)
e }) are uniquely identifiable
from the expected end-to-end observables (25) (resp. (24)) if
and only if A has full column rank, rank(A) = |E|.

Proof. Taking logarithms of (25) gives the linear system
Ax = b with xe = log se and bP = log((2MP − RP )/TP ).

11

A linear map is injective iff its matrix has full column rank,
so x is determined uniquely by b iff rank(A) = |E|; the same
argument applies to {log r(x)

e }.

For trees,

the leaf-to-leaf paths yield full column rank
and Algorithm 1 is the constructive solver realizing it; for
meshes, any probe set with rank(A) = |E| gives a unique
least-squares estimate. Separating d(1)
additionally
e
requires each link to appear in P under both propagation
modes, generalizing the single-link flip of §V.

from d(2)
e

a) Relation to the star gauge fixing: This multi-round
protocol is the general-topology form of the single-link clas-
sical flip of §V, and the rank condition of Proposition 6 plays
the role that Lemma 3 plays for the star. Each probe touches,
on every link it traverses, only the one propagation mode it
happens to encounter; so when monitors sit at the network
edge and no probe isolates a single link, a path can meet
different links in opposite modes, which may leave A column-
rank deficient—its kernel being the residual gauge. The two-
link star is the canonical case. Reconfiguring the classical
traffic adds no unknowns (Assumption 2) but adds rows, so the
incidence-rank condition is really a statement about how many
distinct traffic configurations must be exercised, not merely
how many paths are probed.

3) Sample Size and Accuracy: As suggested in related
network tomography studies, the accuracy of these estima-
tors depends on the number of probes TP . As the network
depth increases, the end-to-end success ratio (cid:81) se decreases
exponentially, requiring larger sample sizes to maintain low
relative error. We confirm these properties with Monte-Carlo
simulations in the Validation section (§VI-D), where the peel-
ing and least-squares estimators recover all per-link parameters
on tree and cyclic-mesh networks and the required sample size
is shown to grow exponentially with path depth; there we also
observe that symmetrized probes (averaging Qk,ℓ and Qℓ,k)
significantly reduce the variance in noisy environments.
√

Since these estimators are

T -consistent (§IV-A), a vari-
ance reduction of factor κ is a sample-size reduction of the
same factor. Averaging the two probe directions combines
two unbiased estimates of equal variance and correlation
c, giving κsym = 2/(1 + c) ∈ [1, 2] for c ∈ [0, 1]: at
most a factor of two, attained only when the directions are
independent, and less in practice since both traverse the same
fiber. For calibration, classical loss tomography ties estimator
variance directly to probe count [22], and Lawrence et al. [33]
report, in a delay-tomography study, that least-squares moment
estimators need roughly 1.3×–9× the probes of the MLE for
equal variance (1.1×–1.3× under generalized least squares).
The larger classical savings thus come from estimator choice
and probe design [28], [34], [35] rather than from directional
symmetrization, for which we know of no classical analogue.

VI. VALIDATION

This section reports the performance of our proposed esti-
mators for link, star-network, and general-topology tomogra-
phy. Throughout, we distinguish three validation modes: ex-
periments denote lab-based testbed measurements; emulations
denote studies that recombine the measured single-link data

12

A

B

C

D

C

D

C

D

E

A

E

A

F

B

F

B

E

F

(a) Identify leaf links

(b) Peel and push monitors to C, D

(c) Identify interior link C −D

Fig. 4: Progressive peeling on a five-link tree (the same network used for the Monte-Carlo simulations in §VI-D), mirroring
the etching illustration in [12, Fig. 6]. Blue squares are monitor (leaf) nodes and white circles are internal nodes; violet
arrows indicate the peeling order from the periphery inward. (a) The four leaf links A−C, B −C, D−E, D−F (green) are
identified from leaf-to-leaf probes via ˆse = (cid:112)Qv,jQv,k/Qj,k, with monitors at the leaves A, B, E, F . (b) Each identified link
is “peeled” and its far endpoint promoted to a monitor, pushing the monitors inward to C and D and exposing the interior link
C −D (orange) as a link between two monitors. (c) The interior link C −D is then identified by the same leaf-link estimator
ˆse = (cid:112)Qv,jQv,k/Qj,k of (21), now applied with C and D as monitors (red).

(a) Depolar. probability at 0.5 km

(b) Depolar. probability at 5.0 km

(c) Depolar. probability at 15 km

Fig. 5: Depolarization probability vs. wavelength for different fiber lengths and propagation directions, where (Co) denotes
co-propagation and (Ct) denotes counter-propagation. The feature near 1542 nm is a measurement artifact of the notch filter
used to suppress the 1542.5 nm classical networking laser (imperfect filter isolation near the laser line) [32], not a property of
the depolarization channel.

into multi-link configurations; and simulations denote Monte-
Carlo studies in which all data, including every per-link param-
eter, are generated on a computer with no testbed provenance.
For link tomography (§VI-B), we utilize experimental data
collected by Chapman et al. [32] and focus on verifying the
correctness of our channel model and the accuracy of our
proposed estimators. For star network tomography (§VI-C),
we emulate a multi-link star network from link-level data
drawn from the same experimental dataset, under two distinct
link-to-network compilations. Finally, we validate the general-
topology estimators of §V-A on simulated tree and mesh
networks (§VI-D).

A. Dataset and Testbed Description

We use subsets of the coexisting fiber dataset collected
by Chapman et al. [32], which consists of polarization-
encoded single-photon measurements over fibers of three
different
lengths: 0.5 km, 5.0 km, and 15 km. For each
fiber length, the data span the three coexistence/depolarization
scenarios x ∈ {0, 1, 2}—(0) no classical signal (pure quan-
tum signal), (1) co-propagation, (2) counter-propagation—
together with an auxiliary classical-only run (no quantum

signal, pure classical signal) used only as a baseline in this
section. We refer to scenario (0) and the classical-only run as
the non-coexistence cases. The quantum-channel wavelength
varies across 91 C-band wavelengths from 1528.38 nm to
1564.68 nm (i.e., 196.150 THz to 191.600 THz), enabling
the study of wavelength-dependent Raman noise effects. Eight
wavelengths are selected for analysis.

Input states and measurements. In each experimental run,
single photons are prepared in one of six polarization states
spanning three mutually unbiased bases (MUBs): horizon-
tal/vertical (|H⟩ , |V ⟩), diagonal/anti-diagonal (|D⟩ , |A⟩), and
right/left circular (|R⟩ , |L⟩). For each input state, the received
photons are measured in each of the three bases, giving
three sub-experiments per input state. In each sub-experiment,
photons are prepared in the fixed input state, transmitted over
the link, and measured in the fixed basis, with a detected count
on the order of 105 (the ∼ 1.25 × 105 baseline reported by
Chapman et al. [32]). In total, the experimental configuration
yields 36 input-measurement combinations (6 input states ×
6 measurement outcomes).

Deriving the observables T , R, and M . From each
experimental configuration we form the 6 × 6 count matrix of

13

(a) 1560 nm wavelength

(b) 1550 nm wavelength

(c) 1545 nm wavelength

(d) 1542 nm wavelength (artifact)

(e) 1540 nm wavelength

(f) 1530 nm wavelength

Fig. 6: Process fidelity vs. distance (km) and propagation direction (co- vs. counter-propagating) for six representative
wavelengths (the 1535 and 1555 nm panels are omitted; their behavior is qualitatively identical) and different methods: (1)
Non-Coex, the method of Chapman et al. [32, Figure 10]; (2) Rev Non-Coex, accounting for the depolarization observed
under pure quantum transmission; (3) Coex QLT, the proposed coexistence quantum link tomography estimator using both co-
and counter-propagation data (§IV); (4) Coex BPT, Bayesian process tomography from Chapman et al. [32, §II]. The residual
fidelity gap between QLT and BPT reflects the off-depolarizing (coherent/non-unital) weight that the depolarizing model cannot
represent.

Algorithm 1 Peeling estimator for tree topologies

Input: Tree T = (V, E); probe ratios Qi,j and Gi,j of (28)–

(29) between monitor (leaf) nodes

Output: Per-link estimates {ˆse, ˆge}e∈E; splitting ˆge into
needs a second traffic configuration

e , ˆr(2)
ˆr(1)
e

initialize: M ← {leaf nodes of T }; D ← ∅

1: while D ̸= E do
2:

e /∈ D

pick a link e = {v, u} with v ∈ M, u /∈ M, and
▷ a current leaf link
choose monitors j, k ∈ M \ {v} whose paths to v first

meet at u

ˆse ← (cid:0)Qv,j Qv,k / Qj,k
estimator, Eq. (21)
ˆge ← (cid:0)Gv,j Gv,k / Gj,k

(cid:1)1/2

(cid:1)1/2

analogue

▷ leaf-link

▷ received-ratio

peel: for all m ∈ M \ {v} do Qu,m ← Qv,m/ˆse,
▷ u inherits the residual

Gu,m ← Gv,m/ˆge
probe ratios

D ← D ∪ {e}; M ← M ∪ {u} ▷ promote u to

3:

4:

5:

6:

7:

a monitor

8: return {ˆse, ˆge}e∈E

the six input states against the six measurement outcomes (the

three MUBs). From this matrix we extract the three quantities
required by our channel model (§II). The first is the total
number of input photons T , i.e. the effective launched-photon
count. We back-calibrate T from the detected counts using the
measured fiber-plus-system insertion-loss budget, rather than
measuring the source flux directly.

input states and all

The second is the total number of received (detected)
photons R, summed across all
three
measurement bases. The third is the number of matched-
outcome photons M , which we obtain from the same ag-
gregated counts together with the estimated depolarization
probability via M = R (1 − p/2). This relation is exactly
the model identity E[M/T ] = s + d(x)/2 = r(x)(1 − p(x)/2).
Aggregating over bases leaves the link relations intact.
Because R and M share the same aggregation and the same T ,
the number of bases summed cancels in the ratios R/T and
M/T . The single-basis relations of (3) therefore carry over
unchanged.

We subtract detector dark counts and background before
forming the observables. Such background is independent of
the classical-traffic configuration, so it cancels in the success-
ratio estimator ˆs = (2M − R)/T : a background of C counts
adds C to R and C/2 to M , and 2(C/2) − C = 0. It biases
each ˆd(x) only by a common +C/T , which leaves the Raman
excess d(x) − d(0) unaffected.

14

We compute these quantities for the three depolarization
scenarios x ∈ {0, 1, 2}, giving the triples (T (x), R(x), M (x)).
An auxiliary classical-only run (no quantum signal) yields one
further triple, which only the non-coexistence baselines below
consult.

Finally, we note that

the two headline link quanti-
ties reported below—the depolarization probability p(x) =
d(x)/r(x) = 2(R − M )/R and the process fidelity, which is
a function of p(x) alone—are exactly invariant to the absolute
scale of T . The QLT-versus-BPT comparisons are thus robust
to any miscalibration of the launched-photon count. Only the
absolute success ratio s, together with the Table I parameters
that depend on it, scales with T .

Polarization drift correction. Due to fiber birefringence,
the polarization reference frame drifts slowly, misaligning the
measurement bases with the prepared states by an unknown
SU (2) rotation Ut that is constant within a batch but varies
across batches. Parameterizing Ut by three angles, we estimate
it per batch by maximum likelihood estimation over the full
36-entry input–measurement table and apply U −1
to realign
the bases. This is not circular: Ut is a purity-preserving frame
rotation (Ut(I/2)U †
t = I/2), so it cannot absorb the basis-
independent depolarization p I/2; the unitary and depolariza-
tion parameters are separately identifiable in the joint fit, and
genuine coherent errors are corrected rather than mislabeled
as success. After realignment, the residual channel is well
approximated by the isotropic depolarizing channel of §II.

t

Baseline: Bayesian process tomography (BPT). As a
baseline, we compare our link tomography estimators against
the Bayesian process tomography (BPT) method of Chapman
et al. [32], which reconstructs the full single-qubit quantum
process matrix from the 36-entry input-measurement combina-
tions via Bayesian inference. While BPT provides a complete
channel characterization, it is computationally far heavier: it is
a member of the broad family of quantum process tomography
(QPT) methods [36], [37] that reconstruct an unconstrained
single-qubit process matrix (a 4 × 4 complex matrix with
d4 − d2 = 12 free real parameters under complete positivity
and trace preservation) by drawing samples from a posterior
via iterative Bayesian inference; structured variants such as
compressed-sensing QPT [38] and gate-set tomography [39]
reduce this cost under sparsity or calibration-robustness as-
sumptions but still target the full process matrix. By contrast,
our QLT estimator (16) exploits the depolarization structure
to recover the four physical parameters (s, d(0), d(1), d(2)) in
closed form, requiring only O(1) arithmetic on the aggregate
counts—no iterative optimization or sampling—thus providing
a complete structured channel characterization at far lower
computational cost, at the price of the modeling assumptions
BPT does not require.

B. Link Tomography Analysis

We

evaluate

the
from §IV on
above,

tors
described
{1530, 1535, 1540, 1542, 1545, 1550, 1555, 1560} nm.

link-level
the

tomography
fiber

estima-
dataset
quantum-signal wavelengths

coexisting

using

a) Method comparison: We compare four methods, orga-
nized into two groups: two non-coexistence baselines that esti-
mate parameters from data collected in isolation (either purely
quantum or purely classical
traffic), and two coexistence
methods that jointly exploit data from all three coexistence
scenarios.

The non-coexistence baselines exploit a simple separation:
when only the quantum signal is present, the observed depolar-
ization is attributable solely to the fiber and system itself (i.e.,
d(0)); when only the classical signal is present, the observed
depolarized photons are attributable solely to co- or counter-
propagating classical traffic1 (i.e., d(x) − d(0) for x = 1, 2).
This separation lets these baselines read off depolarization
parameters directly from each isolated measurement, without
solving the coupled system in (15). Concretely: (1) Non-
Coex [32, Figure 10] estimates the classical-traffic-induced
component d(x) − d(0) from the classical-only data and ig-
nores the baseline depolarization d(0); (2) Rev Non-Coex
is our revision that adds back the baseline term, yielding
(d(x) − d(0)) + d(0) = d(x).

The coexistence methods, in contrast, use measurements
from all three coexistence scenarios (no classical signal, co-
propagation, and counter-propagation) jointly: (3) Coex QLT,
our coexistence quantum link tomography estimator (§IV),
which solves (15) in closed form using both co- and counter-
propagation data; and (4) Coex BPT, the Bayesian process
tomography baseline of Chapman et al. [32].

b) Depolarization probability estimation: Figure 5 shows
the estimated depolarization probabilities p(x) = d(x)/r(x)
as a function of quantum-channel wavelength for the three
fiber lengths. Several observations are worth noting. First,
counter-propagation consistently produces greater depolariza-
tion than co-propagation, confirming the direction-dependent
noise structure predicted by our model (§III-C, Eqs. (13)–
(14)). Second, depolarization increases with fiber length, as
expected from the accumulation of Raman scattering noise
over longer propagation distances. Third, our QLT estimates
closely match the BPT baseline across all wavelengths and
fiber lengths, validating the isotropic-depolarization approxi-
mation that remains after frame-drift correction. Finally, the
anomalous feature near 1542 nm is a notch-filter artifact, not
a property of the depolarization channel: Chapman et al. [32]
attribute it to the notch filter used to remove the 1542.5 nm
classical networking laser, whose imperfect isolation lets the
laser tails leak through near 1542 nm. It is therefore unrelated
to any misspecification of our channel model.

c) Process fidelity estimation: We report

the process
fidelity as the Choi–Jamiołkowski state fidelity [40] between
the depolarizing channel implied by each estimator and the ex-
perimentally reconstructed channel. Writing ρP for the trace-
normalized Choi state of a channel P, an estimate ˆp(x) yields
the depolarizing-channel Choi ρdep(ˆp(x)), and we report the
Uhlmann fidelity F = (cid:0) Tr (cid:112)√
, maximized
over a local input rotation to remove the residual frame drift,

ρdep ρexp

ρdep

(cid:1)2

√

1To make the parameter interpretation consistent with the coexistence
scenarios, the co- and counter-propagation cases here correspond to receiving
the (would-be) quantum signal at the same end as the classical signal or at
the opposite end, respectively.

with ρexp the Choi state reconstructed by BPT from the same
dataset. For an ideal depolarizing channel this reduces to the
entanglement/process fidelity F = 1 − 3
4 ˆp(x) (not the average
gate fidelity 1 − 1
2 ˆp(x)); all four curves of Fig. 6 use this
identical definition and the same ρexp, so the comparison
is on equal footing. Figure 6 shows the estimated process
fidelity as a function of fiber distance for several wavelengths.
The four methods disentangle three effects. Comparing Non-
Coex with Rev Non-Coex isolates the accounting value of
the intrinsic baseline d(0): Non-Coex omits it, producing an
optimistically biased fidelity, and adding it back removes a
systematic gap that is an information/accounting effect, not a
modeling one. Concretely, Non-Coex reads the depolarization
off the classical-only run and so estimates ˆd(x)
NC = d(x) − d(0),
whereas Rev Non-Coex restores the intrinsic term to give d(x).
Since F = 1 − 3
4 p(x) with p(x) = d(x)/(s + d(x)), omitting
d(0) raises the reported fidelity by exactly

∆F =

3
4

·

s d(0)

(cid:0)s + d(x)(cid:1)(cid:0)s + d(x) − d(0)(cid:1) > 0,

(32)

largest at short reach, where d(x) is small and d(0) is a larger
share of the total. Both methods assume the same channel and
the same estimator algebra and differ only in which runs they
consult, which is why we call the gap an accounting rather
than a modeling effect. Comparing Rev Non-Coex with Coex
QLT isolates the value of measuring under genuine coexistence
rather than additively combining isolated quantum-only and
classical-only measurements. Finally, comparing Coex QLT
with Coex BPT—both consuming the full coexistence data—
isolates the adequacy of the closed-form depolarization model:
Coex QLT closely tracks the BPT reference, with only a
small residual gap attributable to the non-depolarizing (coher-
ent/asymmetric) component the two-parameter model omits.
Together this establishes that the depolarization channel model
is an accurate abstraction for process-fidelity prediction in
QCNs, while the first two comparisons quantify the separate
benefit of jointly exploiting all coexistence scenarios.

C. Star Network Tomography Emulation

Lacking a multi-link quantum testbed, we evaluate the star
network tomography methods of §V by composing experimen-
tally derived link-level descriptions—specifically, the per-link
channel parameter estimates and the BPT-estimated channel
maps—into emulated multi-link paths. We emulate a three-link
star network using link-level estimates from the 192.550 THz
(≈1555 nm) channel, with fiber lengths of 0.5 km, 5.0 km,
and 15 km. The hub node connects all three links, and end-
to-end statistics for each pair of end nodes are computed by
composing two link-level channel descriptions. We consider
two compilation strategies that differ in how the individual
link channels are modeled (Figure 7).

a) Compilation Type I (Idealized Depolarization):
In
the first compilation, each link is represented by the ideal-
ized depolarization channel from §II. The channel parameters
(s, d(0), d(1), d(2)) for each link are taken from the link to-
mography estimates of §VI-B. Given these parameters, end-
to-end measurement statistics are generated by composing two

15

Loss 1

Raman 1

Loss 2

Raman 2

Pass 1

Pass 2

Input

Middle

Output

(a) Illustration of two consecutive links

Loss q
Raman d(x) − d(0)
Pass s + d(0)

Type I
Link Est.
Link Est.
Link Est. Bayesian PT

Type II
Link Est.
Link Est.

(b) Two types of compilation

Fig. 7: Star network tomography compilation strategies. Each
end-to-end path traverses two links through the hub. Type I
uses idealized depolarization channels; Type II uses BPT-
estimated channel maps.

depolarization channels according to (19): a photon traverses
link k from the sender to the hub and then link ℓ from the hub
to the receiver, experiencing the appropriate co- or counter-
propagation depolarization on each segment depending on
traffic direction. This compilation provides a
the classical
controlled setting where the channel model is exactly matched,
isolating the estimation accuracy of the network tomography
algorithms.

b) Compilation Type II (BPT-Based Channel Maps): The
second compilation uses the full quantum process matrices
obtained from Bayesian process tomography (BPT) on the
experimental data, rather than the idealized depolarization
model. Specifically, for each link and each classical-traffic
configuration, we use the BPT-estimated channel map P to
generate end-to-end statistics. Given an input population T ,
the expected number of received photons is
R = T (cid:0)sk + d(x(k,1))

(cid:1)(cid:0)sℓ + d(x(ℓ,2))

(33)

(cid:1),

k

ℓ

with sk and d(x)
taken from the link tomography estimates and
k
each factor evaluated at the propagation scenario actually seen
on that hop (cf. (18)), and the number of matched outcomes
M is obtained by drawing each of the R received photons’
outcome from the composed BPT map: we sample |0⟩ with
probability ⟨0| P2 ◦ P1(|0⟩⟨0|) |0⟩, where P1, P2 are the BPT-
estimated qubit process maps for the two links. Note that
the received count R follows the depolarization count model
(loss and Raman injection are not represented by the 2 × 2
process maps), while the per-photon matched fraction M/R
follows the BPT maps; thus Type II stresses model mismatch
in the polarization/process-fidelity channel—and hence in sk,
and through dk = rk − sk in the depolarization estimates—
while the received ratios rk = R/T are governed by the
depolarization count model.

c) Simulation statistics: The counts are drawn as follows.
T is deterministic—the batch size, 105 or 1010. Given T ,

16

TABLE I: Channel parameters at 192.550 THz (≈1555 nm)
for the three fiber lengths (dashed lines in Figs. 8–10).

Channel

Success ratio

Depolarization

length

0.5 km
5 km
15 km

s

0.0017
0.0015
0.0009

Co-prop. d(1)

Counter-prop. d(2)

0.0306
0.1659
0.3355

0.0967
0.3334
0.5916

ℓ

k

each hop applies the binomial cascade implied by §II: the first
hop draws the intact and depolarized populations as two inde-
pendent binomials, Binom(T, sk) and Binom(T, d(x(k,1))
)—
which is what lets R exceed T under Raman injection—and
the second hop splits each of them again by sℓ and d(x(ℓ,2))
.
Then R is the sum of the four resulting populations and
M = Rss + Binom(R − Rss, 1
2 ), with Rss the doubly-intact
population, giving E[R] = T rkrℓ and E[2M − R] = T sksℓ
as required by (18) and (20). For T > 109 each binomial is
replaced by N (np, np(1 − p)), rounded and floored at zero—
the “normal-distribution approximation” of Fig. 9. Type II
compilation changes only M : the count R is drawn exactly
as above, since the 2 × 2 BPT maps carry no loss or injection
information, while each received photon is propagated through
the composed maps in Kraus form, ρout = P2(P1(|0⟩⟨0|)),
and matched with probability ⟨0| ρout |0⟩. Since the imple-
mentation cycles deterministically through the BPT posterior
samples, M | R is Poisson-binomial rather than binomial, and
the error bars reflect shot noise at the posterior-averaged map
rather than posterior uncertainty.

and d(2)
3

d) Network tomography results: Table I lists the link-
level parameters used to configure the three-link star net-
work. To recover all six per-link depolarization parameters,
the emulation realizes the two-configuration protocol of §V:
an original batch and a complementary batch in which the
classical-signal direction on link 3 is flipped (interchanging
d(1)
between the two probe directions, cf. (22)–
3
(23)), and the combined system is solved in closed form.
Without the flip only five of the six depolarization equations
are independent (Lemma 3), so the six per-link depolarization
parameters shown below could not be identified. We apply
the star network estimators of §V to the emulated end-to-
end measurements and examine convergence as a function
of sample size. For reference,
the parameter values from
Table I are plotted as dashed lines in the figures below. In
these figures, each trial corresponds to one emulation run
with a fixed batch sample size (e.g., 105 or 1010 photon
transmissions); the x-axis shows the cumulative number of
consecutive trials used to refine the estimates. Error bars show
±1 sample standard deviation across 10 independent macro-
replicates, each aggregating 100 batches of T photons. As the
number of trials grows, more measurement data is aggregated,
and the link-level estimators converge more closely to the true
parameters.

Figure 8 shows results under Type I compilation with a
batch sample size of 105: the success ratio s does not reliably
converge (due to its low magnitude, ∼ 10−3), but the de-
polarization parameters d(1) and d(2) do. Increasing the batch
sample size to 1010 (Figure 9) substantially improves stability:

the range of the success-ratio estimates narrows from [0, 0.1] to
[0, 0.003]. Figure 10 shows Type II compilation results using
BPT-based channel maps with a batch sample size of 105, il-
lustrating the estimator’s behavior under more realistic channel
conditions. Notably, under Type II compilation, a batch sample
size of 105 already suffices for stable convergence. However,
because the BPT-predicted matched fraction for the 5-km link
differs from the depolarization model’s s + d(x)/2 (consistent
with the imperfect process fidelity in Figure 6), the estimates
for that link, while stably converging, exhibit a persistent bias
relative to the ground truth set by the idealized depolarization
model; this mismatch enters through 2M − R (hence sk) and
propagates to the depolarization estimates via dk = rk − sk.
This also explains which parameters carry the visible bias.
Under Type II only M is perturbed, so ˆr(x)
k —which consumes
R/T alone—stays unbiased to leading order and the mismatch
is carried by ˆsk; since ˆd(x)
k = ˆr(x)
k − ˆsk, the displacement
Bias( ˆd(x)
k ) = − Bias(ˆsk) is independent of x. The bias is thus
a per-link effect: on the 5-km link ˆs2 ≈ 0.06 against a truth of
0.0015, and both of its depolarization estimates are displaced
downward by that same ≈ 0.06; the 15-km link carries the
opposite sign, since there ˆs3 sits at the estimator’s positivity
floor. Because the displacement is shared between the two
modes, the relative bias is larger for the smaller parameter (≈
36% for d(1)
2 ), whereas counter-propagation
carries the larger error bars since Var( ˆd(x)) grows with d(x)—
bias and variance rank the two modes oppositely.

2 vs. ≈ 18% for d(2)

√

√

rkrℓ

T sksℓ/

e) Why sample size matters: The estimator (21) relies
on the difference 2M − R, whose expectation is the product
of two per-link success ratios, E[2Mk,ℓ − Rk,ℓ] = T sksℓ,
of order 10−6 T in the coexistence regime. Because each
received photon contributes a value in {−1, +1} to 2M − R
(+1 if intact, ±1 with equal probability if depolarized), its
variance is at most the received count, Var(2M − R) ⩽
E[R] = T rkrℓ with r = s + d. A Gaussian approximation
(cid:1), so
then gives Pr[2M − R < 0] ≈ Φ(cid:0) −
the square-root estimator is reliable only when this tail is
small, i.e. when T ≳ rkrℓ/(sksℓ)2. For our star parameters
this evaluates to ≈ 0.49 at T = 105 (the success ratio
behaves like a coin flip, explaining its failure to converge in
Fig. 8) and to ≈ 0 by T = 1010 (explaining the narrowing
of the estimate range), with the longest, highest-loss link
setting the binding threshold. This converts the qualitative
observation into a falsifiable, figure-matching prediction and
explains why coexistence network tomography needs sample
sizes orders of magnitude larger than link-level estimation. A
heuristic absolute value |2M − R| helps Type I compilation
but worsens the more realistic Type II; the principled small-
sample remedy is a non-negativity-constrained estimator on
the binomial likelihood. In our implementation the moment
ratio is clamped to the physical range and 2M − R is floored
at machine epsilon to guard against these sub-zero excursions,
which the quoted success-ratio axes reflect.

To quantify this, we re-ran the Type I emulation with the
two guards applied to identical generated data (5 seeds × 2000
macro-replicates). At T = 105 about half the symmetrized
2M − R values are non-positive, and after 100 batches the

17

(a) Per-link success ratios sk

(b) Per-link co-prop. depolar. ratios d(1)
k

(c) Per-link counter-prop. depolar. ratios d(2)
k

Fig. 8: Estimated channel parameters under Type I compilation (sample size 105). Solid markers are the star-network estimates
as a function of the cumulative number of trials; horizontal dashed lines mark the ground-truth link parameters of Table I; error
bars show ±1 sample standard deviation across 10 independent macro-replicates, each aggregating 100 batches of T photons.

(a) Per-link success ratios sk

(b) Per-link co-prop. depolar. ratios d(1)
k

(c) Per-link counter-prop. depolar. ratios d(2)
k

Fig. 9: Estimated channel parameters under Type I compilation (sample size 1010, with normal-distribution approximation).
Dashed lines and error bars are as in Fig. 8: dashed lines mark the Table I ground truth, and error bars show ±1 sample
standard deviation across 10 macro-replicates. Note the narrower success-ratio axis relative to Fig. 8.

(a) Per-link success ratios sk

(b) Per-link co-prop. depolar. ratios d(1)
k

(c) Per-link counter-prop. depolar. ratios d(2)
k

Fig. 10: Estimated channel parameters under Type II compilation (sample size 105). Dashed lines and error bars are as in
Fig. 8. Because the ground truth (dashed) is set by the idealized depolarization model while the data are generated from the
BPT channel maps, the residual offset visible for the 5-km link is the model mismatch discussed in the text, not an estimator
failure.

18

Fig. 11: Per-link success-ratio recovery on a five-link tree
(A − C − B, C − D, D − E, D − F ;
leaves A, B, E, F )
using only leaf-to-leaf probes. Leaf links are estimated by
ˆse = (cid:112)Qv,jQv,k/Qj,k and the internal link C−D is recovered
by peeling. Estimates (sample size T = 5 × 106, 40 repeats)
match ground truth for every link, including the internal one;
error bars are smaller than the markers.

floored estimator is ≈ 6.5× worse in RMSE(ˆs) and ≈ 3.6×
worse in RMSE( ˆd) than the |2M − R| variant. At T = 1010
over 100 batches nothing is floored and the two variants agree
to three significant figures. The harm is not the clipped values
collapsing toward zero, which costs at most the true s ∼ 10−3,
but the reverse: a clipped value in the denominator of (21)
makes the ratio saturate the physical-range clamp and drives
ˆs to ≈ 0.16. (These figures are for Type I; the Type II variant
additionally requires the BPT posterior samples.)

To put the scale in perspective, resolving s to within its
own magnitude requires ∼ 1010 input photons per end-pair; at
an illustrative clocked source rate of 107–108 transmissions
per second this is minutes of integration per end-pair, but
because the requirement grows super-exponentially with depth
(Fig. 13) the depth-5 case (2.5 × 1011 probes) already pushes
acquisition to hours. Recovering the small coexistence success-
ratio signal—rather than the comparatively easy depolarization
parameters—is therefore the binding practical bottleneck.

D. General-Topology Tomography Simulation

We finally validate the general-topology constructions of
§V-A—the tree-peeling estimator,
the general-graph least-
squares solver, and the sample-size scaling—with Monte-
Carlo simulations. These simulations reuse the multi-link path-
composition sampler of the star-network emulation (§VI-C),
but with all per-link parameters assigned synthetically rather
than taken from testbed measurements, so all data here are gen-
erated entirely numerically. These Monte-Carlo simulations
are deliberately self-consistent: the path sampler composes
the same depolarization channels the estimators invert, so
they verify estimator correctness, numerical identifiability, and
sample-complexity scaling under a correctly-specified model.

They are not a test of model fidelity, which is established
only at the link level (Figs. 5, 6) and stressed under Type II
compilation.

a) Peeling on a tree: We construct a five-link tree with
two internal nodes and four leaves and assign distinct per-link
success ratios. Using only end-to-end probes between leaves,
the symmetrized success ratios Q = (2M −R)/T identify each
leaf link through ˆse = (cid:112)Qv,jQv,k/Qj,k (21), and the interior
link C −D is then recovered by peeling its leaf contributions
from a leaf-to-leaf path. Figure 11 shows that all five per-link
parameters are recovered accurately at T = 5×106 probes per
path, confirming the correctness of the peeling construction for
tree topologies.

e∈P log se = log (cid:0)(2MP − RP )/TP

b) General graphs via least squares: For topologies with
cycles the peeling recursion no longer applies, since no link is
incident to a leaf. We instead solve the log-linearized system
of §V-A: taking logarithms of (25) turns each probe into
(cid:1),
the linear constraint (cid:80)
and stacking a sufficient set of paths yields Ax = b with
xe = log se and A the path-by-link incidence matrix. We
validate this on a seven-link 2 × 3 ladder (grid) mesh in which
only the four corner nodes (each of degree two) are probe
terminals and the two degree-three nodes act as relays. Twelve
corner-to-corner paths make the incidence matrix full column
rank (rank 7, cond(A⊤A) ≈ 14), so all seven links—including
the one between the two relays—are identifiable. Solving in
the least-squares sense recovers every per-link success ratio,
with the link-averaged relative error decreasing as T −1/2
(Figure 12). The same construction applied to the received
ratios r(x)
recovers the depolarization parameters once each
link is probed in both propagation modes.

e

c) Sample size grows with depth: Because the end-to-
end success signal (cid:81)
e∈P se shrinks geometrically with path
length, longer paths demand disproportionately more probes.
We quantify this on chains of n identical links (se = 0.05,
de = 0.20) and record the sample size required for the per-
link estimator ˆs = (cid:0)(2M − R)/T (cid:1)1/n
to reach 5% relative
error. A delta-method analysis predicts Treq(n) = [sn(1 −
sn) + ((s+d)n − sn)]/(n2s2nϵ2), whose per-hop multiplier
is not constant but grows (38×, 62×, 89× for the simulated
points), approaching (s+d)/s2 for long paths (= 100 at
se = 0.05). Figure 13 confirms this law, reproducing the
simulated probe counts to within tens of percent; the ≈ 59×
figure is the geometric-mean slope at this illustrative se, and
in the experimental coexistence regime s ∼ 10−3 (Table I)
the per-hop factor is far larger. This substantiates the observa-
tion (Section VII) that network-level estimation in coexisting
quantum networks demands sample sizes several orders of
magnitude larger than link-level estimation, and motivates the
variance-reduction techniques (symmetrized probes, repeated
batches) discussed in §V-A.

VII. CONCLUSION
This work presented a tomography framework for charac-
terizing quantum-classical coexistence networks (QCNs) from
end-to-end measurements. We introduced a channel model
for the coexisting fiber that decomposes the quantum sig-
nal evolution into photon loss, successful transmission, and

19

Fig. 12: General-graph least-squares recovery on a cyclic mesh (2 × 3 ladder/grid: top path 1−2−3, bottom path 4−5−6, rungs
1−4, 2−5, 3−6; seven links, two 4-cycles, no leaves). All per-link success ratios are inferred from corner-to-corner probes
only (terminals 1, 3, 4, 6; nodes 2, 5 are relays) by solving the log-linearized system Ax = b, xe = log se, in the least-squares
sense over twelve paths (incidence matrix rank 7, full column rank). Left: recovered se versus ground truth at T = 107 per
path. Right: link-averaged relative error decreasing as T −1/2.

Fig. 13: Sample-size requirements grow super-exponentially with network depth. Left: relative error of the per-link estimator
ˆs versus sample size T for identical-link chains of depth n = 2, . . . , 6 (se = 0.05). Right: the sample size needed to reach
5% relative error versus depth (1.2 × 106, 4.5 × 107, 2.8 × 109, 2.5 × 1011 probes for n = 2, . . . , 5). The consecutive per-hop
multipliers increase (38×, 62×, 89×), consistent with the closed form Treq(n) = [sn(1 − sn) + ((s+d)n − sn)]/(n2s2nϵ2),
whose per-hop ratio tends to (s+d)/s2 (here = 100); the ≈ 59× quoted elsewhere is the geometric-mean slope of the semi-log
fit at the illustrative se = 0.05.

direction-dependent depolarization, capturing the distinct noise
signatures of co- and counter-propagating classical traffic due
to Raman scattering. From this model, we derived closed-form
link-level estimators for all channel parameters, including the
success ratio, photon loss ratio, and three depolarization ratios.
We then extended the approach to star-topology networks by
formulating a system of multiplicative equations across end-

node pairs, and proposed a classical-signal-direction-switching
strategy to resolve all per-link depolarization parameters.

Analysis of real coexisting fiber testbed data validated the
channel model at the link level—the link tomography esti-
mates closely match Bayesian process tomography baselines
across multiple fiber lengths and wavelengths—while the star-
network estimators were verified for correctness and identifia-

20

bility on multi-link paths emulated by composing the same
testbed data (with robustness to model mismatch assessed
using BPT-reconstructed channel maps), and the general-
topology estimators and the sample-complexity scaling were
verified in fully synthetic Monte-Carlo simulations.

Beyond the core framework, we developed two extensions:
a quantum-channel model that factorizes the coexisting fiber
into a CPTP tensor product of two maps on separate optical
modes—a depolarizing-with-loss signal channel on the signal
mode and a Raman-noise-injection channel on the broad-
band mode carrying the scattered photons—whose two-mode
photon-number observable accounts for the extra photons
that coexistence delivers, and whose link observables reduce
exactly to the basic model, and a generalization to arbitrary
topologies via tree peeling and a general-graph least-squares
estimator that we verified in Monte-Carlo simulation under a
correctly-specified model.

Our results also revealed that network-level estimation
in QCNs demands sample sizes several orders of magni-
tude larger than link-level estimation, because the signal of
interest—the product of per-link success ratios—is extremely
small in the coexistence regime. We derive a closed-form law
for this cost, Treq(n) ∝ [sn(1−sn)+((s+d)n −sn)]/(n2s2n),
whose per-hop multiplier grows with depth toward (s + d)/s2
(Figure 13); the often-quoted ≈ 59× per added link is the
geometric-mean slope at the illustrative value se = 0.05, and
is far larger in the experimentally measured regime s ∼ 10−3.
Deployment guidelines. Three of our findings translate di-
rectly into operator decisions. (1) Prefer co-propagation rout-
ing where topology allows: counter-propagating classical traf-
fic inflates the depolarization probability by a factor of 1.8×–
3.2× over co-propagation in our data (Table I; largest at short
reach), so co-propagating the quantum and classical channels
on a shared link yields measurably higher fidelity. (2) Keep
monitored path depth shallow: because the end-to-end success
signal is the product (cid:81)
e∈P se, the probe budget to reach a
fixed relative error grows super-exponentially with the number
of hops (Figure 13), so where direct access is available one
should characterize links individually and confine purely end-
to-end tomography to paths of depth ≲ 2–3. (3) Avoid quantum
wavelengths inside the classical crosstalk band: the anomalous
depolarization feature near the 1542 nm classical-laser line
(Figure 5) shows that guard-band placement of the quantum
channel away from the classical carrier is essential.
Future Directions. Several promising directions remain open.
We establish exact identifiability of the per-link parameters—
for the star via the gauge argument of Lemma 3 and for
general network topologies via the incidence-rank condition of
Proposition 6—and give a sample-complexity scaling law for
the success-ratio estimator; sharp finite-sample (e.g. minimax)
bounds and optimal probe-set design for general topologies
remain open. Our current model also focuses on the depo-
larization noise structure induced by Raman scattering; other
noise sources—such as direct crosstalk between the classical
and quantum signals, signal conversion at the transmitter and
receiver, or nonlinear effects such as four-wave mixing—
introduce additional noise components in certain scenarios
and could be incorporated into a more comprehensive channel

model. Moreover, the sample-size requirements for network-
level estimation could potentially be reduced through more ef-
ficient probe allocation strategies or regularized estimators that
exploit prior knowledge of the parameter regime. Finally, the
single highest-value next experiment is a direct physical two-
link test—splicing two calibrated spools and measuring the
end-to-end (R/T, M ) statistics against the composition law
of (19)—which would close the gap between the composed-
link emulation used here and a fully physical multi-link
validation.

DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY

The experimental dataset analyzed in this work was col-
lected by Chapman et al. [32]; access is available from the
authors of that work subject to the applicable institutional
release procedures. The closed-form link and star-network esti-
mators, the general-topology peeling and least-squares solvers,
and the multi-link Monte-Carlo sampler used for the star-
network emulation and general-topology simulations will be
made available in a public repository (with an archival DOI)
upon publication, subject to Oak Ridge National Laboratory
and U.S. Department of Energy software-release approval;
until then, the code is available from the corresponding author
upon reasonable request.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Generative AI disclosure: During the preparation of this
work the author(s) used Gemini Pro to assist with language
editing and paragraph rephrasing. After using this tool, the
author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take
full responsibility for the content of the publication.

This work was performed in part at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, operated by UT-Battelle for the U.S. Department
of Energy under contract no. DE-AC05-00OR22725. Funding
was provided by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of
Science, Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research,
through the Performance Integrated Quantum Scalable Internet
program (ERKJ432).

REFERENCES

[1] K. Azuma, S. E. Economou, D. Elkouss, P. Hilaire, L. Jiang, H.-K.
Lo, and I. Tzitrin, “Quantum repeaters: From quantum networks to the
quantum internet,” Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 95, no. 4, p. 045006,
2023.

[2] C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, “Quantum cryptography: Public key
distribution and coin tossing,” Theoretical computer science, vol. 560,
pp. 7–11, 2014.

[3] L. Jiang, J. M. Taylor, A. S. Sørensen, and M. D. Lukin, “Distributed
quantum computation based on small quantum registers,” Physical
Review A—Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, vol. 76, no. 6, p.
062323, 2007.

[4] A. S. Cacciapuoti, M. Caleffi, F. Tafuri, F. S. Cataliotti, S. Gherardini,
and G. Bianchi, “Quantum internet: Networking challenges in distributed
quantum computing,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 137–143, 2019.
[5] X. Guo, C. R. Breum, J. Borregaard, S. Izumi, M. V. Larsen, T. Gehring,
M. Christandl, J. S. Neergaard-Nielsen, and U. L. Andersen, “Distributed
quantum sensing in a continuous-variable entangled network,” Nature
Physics, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 281–284, 2020.

[6] P. D. Townsend, “Simultaneous quantum cryptographic key distribution
and conventional data transmission over installed fibre using wavelength-
division multiplexing,” Electronics Letters, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 188–190,
1997.

21

[29] I. Mandelbaum and M. Bolshtyansky, “Raman amplifier model in single-
mode optical fiber,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 15, no. 12,
pp. 1704–1706, 2003.

[30] N. A. Peters, P. Toliver, T. E. Chapuran, R. J. Runser, S. R.
McNown, C. G. Peterson, D. Rosenberg, N. Dallmann, R.
J.
Hughes, K. P. McCabe, J. E. Nordholt, and K. T. Tyagi, “Dense
wavelength multiplexing of 1550 nm qkd with strong classical
channels in reconfigurable networking environments,” New Journal of
Physics, vol. 11, no. 4, p. 045012, apr 2009. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/11/4/045012

[31] P. D. Drummond and J. F. Corney, “Quantum noise in optical fibers.
i. stochastic equations,” Journal of the Optical Society of America B,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 139–152, 2001.

[32] J. C. Chapman, J. M. Lukens, M. Alshowkan, N. Rao, B. T. Kirby,
and N. A. Peters, “Coexistent quantum channel characterization using
spectrally resolved bayesian quantum process tomography,” Physical
Review Applied, vol. 19, no. 4, p. 044026, 2023.

[33] E. Lawrence, G. Michailidis, and V. N. Nair, “Statistical inverse prob-
lems in active network tomography,” in Complex Datasets and Inverse
Problems: Tomography, Networks and Beyond, ser. IMS Lecture Notes–
Monograph Series.
Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 2007, vol. 54,
pp. 24–44.

[34] T. He, C. Liu, A. Swami, D. Towsley, T. Salonidis, A. I. Bejan, and P. Yu,
“Fisher information-based experiment design for network tomography,”
in Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGMETRICS International Conference
on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems, 2015, pp. 389–
402.

[35] B. Kveton, M. J. Amjad, C. Diot, D. Konomis, A. Soule, and X. Yang,
“Optimal probing with statistical guarantees for network monitoring at
scale,” Computer Communications, vol. 192, pp. 119–131, 2022.
[36] I. L. Chuang and M. A. Nielsen, “Prescription for experimental deter-
mination of the dynamics of a quantum black box,” Journal of Modern
Optics, vol. 44, no. 11–12, pp. 2455–2467, 1997.

[37] M. Mohseni, A. T. Rezakhani, and D. A. Lidar, “Quantum-process
tomography: Resource analysis of different strategies,” Physical Review
A, vol. 77, no. 3, p. 032322, 2008.

[38] A. Shabani, R. L. Kosut, M. Mohseni, H. Rabitz, M. A. Broome, M. P.
Almeida, A. Fedrizzi, and A. G. White, “Efficient measurement of
quantum dynamics via compressive sensing,” Physical Review Letters,
vol. 106, no. 10, p. 100401, 2011.

[39] R. Blume-Kohout, J. K. Gamble, E. Nielsen, K. Rudinger, J. Mizrahi,
K. Fortier, and P. Maunz, “Demonstration of qubit operations below
a rigorous fault tolerance threshold with gate set tomography,” Nature
Communications, vol. 8, p. 14485, 2017.

[40] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum
Information, 10th ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
2010.

[7] T. He, L. Ma, A. Swami, and D. Towsley, Network tomography: identi-
fiability, measurement design, and network state inference. Cambridge
University Press, 2021.

[8] M. Pant, H. Krovi, D. Towsley, L. Tassiulas, L. Jiang, P. Basu, D. En-
glund, and S. Guha, “Routing entanglement in the quantum internet,”
npj Quantum Information, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 25, 2019.

[9] X. Wang, M. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Li, M. Hajiesmaili, J. C. Lui, and
D. Towsley, “Learning best paths in quantum networks,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, 2025.

[10] K. Azuma, “Networking quantum networks with minimum cost aggre-

gation,” npj Quantum Information, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 51, 2025.

[11] G. Vardoyan and S. Wehner, “Quantum network utility maximization,”
in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and
Engineering (QCE), vol. 1.

IEEE, 2023, pp. 1238–1248.

[12] X. Wang, M. G. De Andrade, G. Avis, Y.-Z. J. Chen, M. Hajiesmaili,
and D. Towsley, “Quantum network tomography for general topology
with spam errors,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01074, 2025.

[13] K. Patel, J. Dynes, I. Choi, A. Sharpe, A. Dixon, Z. Yuan, R. Penty,
and A. Shields, “Coexistence of high-bit-rate quantum key distribution
and data on optical fiber,” Physical Review X, vol. 2, no. 4, p. 041010,
2012.

[14] L.-J. Wang, K.-H. Zou, W. Sun, Y. Mao, Y.-X. Zhu, H.-L. Yin, Q. Chen,
Y. Zhao, F. Zhang, T.-Y. Chen et al., “Long-distance copropagation of
quantum key distribution and terabit classical optical data channels,”
Physical Review A, vol. 95, no. 1, p. 012301, 2017.

[15] J. C. Chapman, A. Miloshevsky, H.-H. Lu, N. Rao, M. Alshowkan,
and N. A. Peters, “Two-mode squeezing over deployed fiber coexisting
with conventional communications,” Optics Express, vol. 31, no. 16, pp.
26 254–26 275, 2023.

[16] P. R¨ubeling, J. Heine, R. Johanning, and M. Kues, “Quantum and
transmission on a single-frequency channel via the
coherent signal
electro-optic serrodyne technique,” Science Advances, vol. 10, no. 30,
p. eadn8907, 2024.

[17] J. Wang, B. J. Rollick, Z. Jia, and B. A. Huberman, “Time-interleaved
c-band co-propagation of quantum and classical channels,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, 2024.

[18] R. Wang, R. Yang, M. Clark, R. D. Oliveira, S. Bahrani, M. Perani´c,
M. Lonˇcari´c, M. Stipˇcevi´c, J. Rarity, S. K. Joshi et al., “Field trial of
a dynamically switched quantum network supporting co-existence of
entanglement, prepare-and-measure qkd and classical channels,” in IET
Conference Proceedings CP839, vol. 2023, no. 34.
IET, 2023, pp.
1682–1685.

[19] J. M. Thomas, F. I. Yeh, J. H. Chen, J. J. Mambretti, S. J. Kohlert, G. S.
Kanter, and P. Kumar, “Quantum teleportation coexisting with classical
communications in optical fiber,” Optica, vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 1700–1707,
2024.

[20] M. Antesberger, C. M. Richter, F. Poletti, R. Slav´ık, P. Petropoulos,
H. H¨ubel, A. Trenti, P. Walther, and L. A. Rozema, “Distribution of
telecom entangled photons through a 7.7 km antiresonant hollow-core
fiber,” Optica Quantum, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 173–180, 2024.

[21] M. Coates, A. O. Hero III, R. Nowak, and B. Yu, “Internet tomography,”
IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 47–65, 2002.
[22] R. C´aceres, N. G. Duffield, J. Horowitz, and D. Towsley, “Multicast-
based inference of network-internal loss characteristics,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 2462–2480, 1999.
[23] F. Lo Presti, N. G. Duffield, J. Horowitz, and D. Towsley, “Multicast-
based inference of network-internal delay distributions,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 761–775, 2002.
[24] Y. Tsang, M. Coates, and R. D. Nowak, “Network delay tomography,”
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2125–2136,
2003.

[25] M. G. De Andrade, J. Diaz, J. Navas, S. Guha, I. Monta˜no, B. Smith,
M. Raymer, and D. Towsley, “Quantum network tomography with multi-
party state distribution,” in 2022 IEEE International Conference on
Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 400–
409.

[26] M. G. De Andrade, J. Navas, I. Monta˜no, and D. Towsley, “On the
characterization of quantum flip stars with quantum network tomogra-
phy,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing
and Engineering (QCE), vol. 1.

IEEE, 2023, pp. 1260–1270.

[27] M. G. De Andrade, J. Navas, S. Guha, I. Monta˜no, M. Raymer, B. Smith,
and D. Towsley, “Quantum network tomography,” IEEE Network, 2024.
[28] X. Wang, Y.-Z. J. Chen, M. Guedes de Andrade, M. Hajiesmaili, J. C.
Lui, T. He, and D. Towsley, “Online optimal probe allocation for
quantum network tomography,” in International Conference on Quantum
Communications, Networking, and Computing, 2026.

