An optical-fibre-integrated buffer for packet-switched quantum networks

Daniel Spegel-Lexne,1, ∗ Joakim Argillander,1 Martin Clason,1 ˚Asa Claesson,2
Kenny Hey Tow,3 Gustavo Lima,4, 5 Jo˜ao M. B. Pereira,3 and Guilherme B. Xavier1, †
1Institutionen f¨or Systemteknik, Link¨opings Universitet, 581 83, Link¨oping, Sweden
2Fibrelab, RISE-Research Institutes of Sweden, Fibrev¨agen 2-6, 82450, Hudiksvall, Sweden
3Fibre Optics, RISE-Research Institutes of Sweden, Electrum 236, 16440, Kista, Sweden
4Departamento de F´ısica, Universidad de Concepci´on, 160-C Concepci´on, Chile
5Millennium Institute for Research in Optics, Universidad de Concepci´on, 160-C Concepci´on, Chile
(Dated: August 6, 2026)

Packet-switched quantum networks require buffers that can delay qubit payloads while routing
information is read out in real time. Previous approaches have not provided this functionality in
a fully fibre-integrated architecture compatible with telecom infrastructure. Here we demonstrate
an optical-fibre-integrated buffer, based on a recirculating loop and a fibre storage line, in which
the storage time of a polarisation-encoded qubit payload is determined by readout of an attached
packet header. The key component behind this achievement is an ultra-low-loss poled fibre phase
modulator, which provides fast, polarisation-insensitive switching directly in fibre and allows header
and payload to be processed within the buffer. We demonstrate storage and retrieval of polarisation-
encoded qubit payloads for storage times up to 47 µs, with an average quantum bit error rate of
1.8% together with stable operation over several hours. These results establish a practical fibre-based
architecture for packet-level quantum network buffering that can easily integrate into the current
telecommunication infrastructure opening up new paths for deployment of the quantum internet.

INTRODUCTION

Realizing large-scale quantum networks, often framed
as a “quantum internet”, would enable functionalities
that are fundamentally out of reach for classical com-
munication networks, including device-independent se-
curity and distributed quantum computing [1, 2]. Es-
sentially,
in all architectures, photons in the telecom
band are the natural carriers of quantum information
across metropolitan and intercity links owing to the low-
loss properties of commercial optical fibres in the 1550
nm spectral region [3, 4]. Quantum key distribution
(QKD) is a well-established quantum communication ap-
plication, having had many demonstrations ranging from
foundational experiments to modern, ultra-long-distance
and side-channel attack secure versions [5–8], as well as
field demonstrations now spanning terrestrial fibre net-
works and free-space and satellite links [9–12]. As these
systems evolve from point-to-point demonstrations to
multi-user networks, they increasingly require network-
layer primitives, such as packet buffering, without de-
grading the fragile quantum states [2, 13].

Recently, significant effort has been dedicated to de-
veloping a framework for packet-switched quantum net-
works as a natural extension from classical packet-
switched communication extensively used over the Inter-
net [14–16]. Within a network node, quantum memo-
ries [17–19] are needed to act as buffers allowing time
for header processing belonging to each quantum packet.
Typical quantum memory implementations, although

∗ daniel.spegel-lexne@liu.se
† guilherme.b.xavier@liu.se

nowadays offering excellent performance in terms of stor-
age lifetime or efficiency, have the general disadvantage of
being relatively complex and not directly spectrally com-
patible with optical-fibre telecom infrastructure, as well
as requiring cryogenic cooling and bulk optical elements
making them challenging to integrate into real-world net-
work nodes [20, 21].

Another approach to try to bridge the gap towards
more practical quantum memories is based on the use of
an optical loop (working as the quantum memory), com-
bined with an optical switch for storage/retrieval [22].
This approach has been highly successful with many rel-
evant applications being demonstrated [23–32]. All these
previous approaches relied on bulk optical elements, mak-
ing it difficult to integrate with fibre-optical components,
thus greatly limiting their use for quantum communica-
tion and networking applications. Recently, efforts on
fibre-based recirculating memories for quantum applica-
tions have included a fibre loop with an electro-optical
switch with storage periods of several µs [33]. Other
very recent approaches managed to have very much faster
storage periods but with the recirculating loop itself im-
plemented in free-space [34–36]. Furthermore, none of
these previous experiments have demonstrated higher-
level functions like processing a packet with a payload
containing quantum states. Therefore, an efficient, fully
fibre integrated approach with fast temporal responses
capable of packet handling is still missing.

Here we cover this gap by demonstrating an optical-
fibre-integrated processing buffer for packet-switched
quantum networks, based on a Sagnac-loop switch [37]
and a fibre storage line controlled by an ultra-low-loss
poled-fibre phase modulator [38–42]. This key device ex-
hibits much lower losses compared with commercial fibre-
optical lithium niobate (LiNbO3) modulators, as well as

arXiv:2608.04093v1  [quant-ph]  4 Aug 2026exhibiting polarisation independence, a key property for
handling polarisation-encoded quantum states. We suc-
cessfully demonstrate storage, and subsequent retrieval
of a polarisation qubit payload across the fibre buffer,
as well as active readout of a header while the payload
remains stored. Our results demonstrate a practical and
fully telecom compatible fibre architecture for processing
buffers for the quantum internet. Parallel to this work in
a companion submission [43], a completely distinct ap-
plication of poled fiber modulators for quantum informa-
tion was demonstrated, through the construction of an
ultra-high efficiency active receiver for high-dimensional
photonic quantum states in a quantum key distribution
demonstration. Together we demonstrate the first uses
of poled fibre phase modulators for quantum informa-
tion processing applications, whose unique characteris-
tics, namely, ultra-low-loss, fast response times, polar-
isation state insensitivity and direct fibre compatibility
may open the path forward for highly demanding quan-
tum communication applications.

RESULTS

Quantum network buffering

The quantum internet requires switching and real-time
processing of packets of quantum states at the network
nodes [14–16], in a similar fashion to the standard in-
ternet. A typical packet structure consists of a payload
containing a number of quantum states and a classical
header, which holds classical information needed for real-
time processing of the packet at each network node (Fig.
1a). We encode the header and payload at the same
wavelength, with our implementation being able to split
the header from the payload within the buffer, owing to
the high-speed response of the poled phase modulator.

A typical quantum networking scenario occurs in a star
network, where multiple users are connected to a central
node, responsible for processing and rerouting the pack-
ets (Fig. 1b). As an example, N simultaneous users wish
to distribute quantum states to M other users, all con-
nected through the central processing node, with a multi-
port switch that can connect any input to any output
(Fig. 1c). At the end of each quantum channel between
the N transmitting users and the central node, packet
buffers are deployed to appropriately delay the packets
before they are processed by the switch. The quantum
states are sequentially prepared within a payload by each
user and a header containing destination information (i.e.
an address) is added to each payload. The header will
be processed at the central node, to determine how to
configure the switch for the correct routing operation.
The node further checks whether the continuing commu-
nication channels to each of the M destination users is
available. If packets with the same final destination (i.e.
M1) arrive at the node with a time difference ∆τ < τp,
where τp is the time duration of the packet, then they will

2

overlap in time in the outgoing channel, and the receiver
will be unable to distinguish between them. Buffers are
then used before the switch to delay the packets appro-
priately, such that they can all enter the same channel to
M1 without overlapping in time.

Figure 1. Quantum network packet switching. a) Packet
structure consisting of a header containing classical informa-
tion and a payload consisting of quantum states. b) A star
network configuration, with multiple users connected through
a central switching node. c) N users are connected to M users
in a star configuration, where the central node has buffering
and switching functionality. Packets can be sent from any of
the N to the M users at will. As an example, if packets from
users N1, N2 and N3, which are all addressed to the same end
user (M1), arrive simultaneously at the central node, then the
packets will collide in the outgoing communication channel to
M1. Buffering is therefore needed to time-multiplex the pack-
ets to avoid collisions in the outgoing link. The central node
also needs to process the header, which contains source and
destination information for instance. With this information,
the delay amount in the buffer is decided by the node. Our
implementation allows both header processing and buffering
functionality for a packet.

BN1BN2BN3BNSwitchHeader(Classic)Payload(Single Photons)a)c)b)IntensityTimePoled optical fibre phase modulator

Previous active loop recirculating memories often rely
on bulk electro-optical modulators for storage/retrieval
control, which limits integration capabilities within opti-
cal fibre communication systems. Commercial fibre pig-
tailed electro-optical modulators have typically high in-
sertion losses (∼ 50%) that greatly hamper their use
for multi-pass quantum photonics applications or mea-
surements that have a high minimum threshold detec-
tion efficiency. Therefore we resort to optical fibre poling
technology to construct an in-fibre low-loss phase mod-
ulator for the recirculating loop memory. The poled fi-
bre phase modulator used here was fabricated from a
specially designed single-mode silica fibre containing two
longitudinal holes running parallel to the core. These
holes were drilled at the preform stage before fibre draw-
ing and subsequently filled with bismuth electrodes in a
pressure chamber, producing the cross-section shown in
Fig. 2a [41].

Figure 2. Poled fibre modulator. a) The cross-section of the
poled fibre phase modulator is shown, imaged using a Vytran
glass processor. b) Interference curves at the two outputs
of a fibre-optical Sagnac interferometer driven by the poled
fibre phase modulator. The outputs are measured with the
two single-photon detectors. The interferometer is the same
one employed in our experiment, please see in the next sec-
tion for details. The error bars represent the standard devi-
ation assuming a Poissonian photon number distribution. c)
Time domain response from a driving pulse applied to the
poled modulator within the Sagnac interferometer.
In this
measurement, the classical optical output is measured with a
p-i-n photo-receiver. The rise and fall times are measured to
be 22.4 ns and 26.4 ns respectively.

The application of an electric field between the elec-
trodes causes a phase shift to be applied to the propa-
gating light due to the Kerr effect. Due to the low op-
tical non-linearity of glass, the optical fibre is first poled
by coupling to its core 532 nm light from a Nd:YAG

3

laser, while simultaneously applying a high-voltage of ≈ 5
kV, allowing electric charges to redistribute and leaving
a long-lived recorded electric field in the glass after the
poling field is removed [44]. After poling, the needed
voltage to apply a π phase shift decreases from approx-
imately (Vπ ≈ 5 kV) for 950 V to our device (Fig. 2b),
and in terms of time response, we obtain a rise and fall
time of 22.4 and 26.4 ns respectively (Fig. 2c). Since
the phase modulator is essentially just an optical fibre,
the losses are very low and mainly limited by the fibre
connectors, which we measure to be 0.4 dB.

Fibre-optical active loop memory

A recirculating quantum memory typically consists of
a resonating circuit, with an active device needed to in-
ject the photonic quantum states onto the circuit, and
then retrieve it after some chosen time [22]. We em-
ploy a combination of a fibre-optical Sagnac interferom-
eter with a fibre delay line and a mirror to complete the
resonator circuit. The Sagnac interferometer acts as an
optical switch, determining whether the states are stored
or retrieved. Such interferometers are very fast optical
switches with several applications in quantum informa-
tion [45–49]. Our experimental setup is depicted in Fig.
3.

A source of weak coherent states, comprising of a con-
tinuous wave semiconductor laser diode at 1546.9 nm in
tandem with an LiNbO3 intensity modulator, produces
a payload of 16 sequential pulses, with a period of 20
ns and a width of 10 ns at a repetition frequency of 975
Hz. A high voltage DC source feeds a high-voltage switch
(Berkeley Nucleonics) capable of delivering up to 1 kV of
pulse amplitude. As the modulator acts as a capacitor,
it has very high impedance. Thus a 50 Ω high-voltage
power resistor is connected in parallel to the modulator.
This limits the repetition rate / pulse width product as
the drawn current is limited by the DC source. The po-
larisation states of the pulses are set with a linear po-
lariser followed by a half-wave plate (HWP). The pulses
are then attenuated to the single photon level, (average
0.1 photons per pulse), approximately 1.6 photons per
payload.

The payload is then delivered to the fibre-optical
Sagnac interferometer, which consists of a circulator, a
50 : 50 fibre coupler, a 1 km spooled fibre delay, the
poled-fibre phase modulator and a manual polarisation
controller to maximise the interference of the superpos-
ing co- and counter-propagating paths back on the fibre
coupler. In one of the Sagnac outputs, the storage line
is connected, consisting of a 100 m delay fibre, a manual
polarisation controller and a fibre Bragg grating (FBG)
acting as a mirror. The lengths of the fibre spools were
chosen for convenience, and different lengths can be used
depending on the desired payload length and overall stor-
age time per cycle.

The other output, going back through the circulator,

a)b)c)Poled Fiber Phase Modulator4

Figure 3. All-fibre quantum packet buffer implementation. We prepare weak coherent polarisation encoded qubits in the state
preparation stage. A fibre coupler is employed at the output of this stage, and connected to a superconducting nanowire
single-photon detector (SNSPD) for photon number calibration purposes. Then an optical circulator leads to the routing stage
consisting of a Sagnac interferometer with the poled fibre phase modulator used to control whether a relative ϕ = 0 or ϕ = π
phase shift is applied onto the packets, thus causing it to be routed to the storage line or to exit the loop back through the
circulator. A fibre delay is employed in the Sagnac loop to ensure the phase shift is applied to the entire packet in only one
of the counter-propagating directions. The storage line consists of a 100 m fibre delay, a manual polarisation controller and a
mirror composed of a fibre Bragg grating. The measurement stage consists of a manual polarisation controller and a polarising
beam splitter, whose two outputs are connected to two other SNSPDs. Att: Optical attenuator; Circ: Optical circulator;
FBG: Fibre Bragg grating; HWP: Half-wave plate; IM: Intensity modulator; PC: Manual polarisation controller; PFPM: Poled
fibre phase modulator; Pol: Linear polariser; VOPC: Voltage operated polarisation controller; PBS: Polarising beam splitter;
SNSPD: Superconducting nanowire single-photon detector.

is then connected to a manual polarisation controller
and a fibre polarisation beamsplitter (PBS) to perform
a projective measurement on the retrieved polarisation
qubits. Finally, the two outputs from the PBS are con-
nected to two superconducting nanowire single-photon
detectors (SNSPDs), within the same cryostat of the cal-
ibration detector. They have a nominal system detection
efficiency > 90% and less than 30 dark counts per second
for each detector. A time tagger (IdQuantique ID1000)
is used to process the detection events.

The Sagnac interferometer acts as a tunable optical
switch, routing the photon between the two outputs de-
pending on the setting ϕ of the poled fibre phase modu-
lator. The relation between the applied phase difference
and the probability of detecting a photon at the two out-
puts D1 and D2 of the interferometer is proportional to
cos2 (cid:16) ϕ
[45]. If no relative phase is ap-
plied (ϕ = 0) the photon will exit through the same path
it entered. If the phase is set to ϕ = π the photon will
exit through the other output and thus, in our setup, en-
ter the storage line. The photon is reflected back by the
FBG and reenters the Sagnac loop.

and sin2 (cid:16) ϕ

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

2

2

Since now the photon is entering from the opposing

port, if ϕ = 0 the photon reflects back to the storage
line and it becomes effectively trapped in a resonating
circuit. Once a relative phase ϕ = π is applied, then
the single-photon exits to the circulator and is retrieved
from the memory. It then propagates to the measurement
operation by the PBS before arriving at either detector
D1 or D2.

The poled fibre phase modulator is driven by a high-
voltage driver consisting of a DC power supply and a fast
high-voltage switch. It generates two consecutive pulses
separated in time, each 330 ns wide with 950 V ampli-
tude, corresponding to a π phase shift (inset Fig. 2). The
first pulse causes the qubit packet to be stored while the
second retrieves it. By adjusting the delay between the
two consecutive driving pulses, the photon payload can
be stored and retrieved for a different number of cycles in
the buffer. The period between each cycle where readout
is possible is about ≈ 6µs for the particular lengths of
optical fibre in the Sagnac loop and storage line in our
experiment. Note that the minimum storage time is one
cycle.

Experimental results

We initially demonstrate the retrieval of a payload over
different storage cycles, as determined by the delay be-
tween the high-voltage driving pulses. The payload con-
sisting of the train of 16 weak coherent states is sent to
the input of the Sagnac loop, with the measurement data
acquired by accumulating the detection events with the
time tagger with each cycle delay measured with a 30
sec integration time, and all the curves are superposed
and plotted in Fig. 4. The PBS before the detectors was
removed for this initial measurement. The manual po-
larisation controllers are needed to compensate residual
polarisation transformations for each storage cycle, and
ensure optimal interferometric visibility at the Sagnac
interferometer.

We clearly see the expected exponential decay in the
detection probability between storage cycles, where the
losses come from the fibre spools (0.3 dB), poled phase
modulator (0.4 dB), fibre coupler (0.5 dB), FBG (0.1
dB), and additional losses from connectors and splices
(1.2 dB), amounting to an efficiency of ≈ 56% per cycle.
There is also an additional loss of approximately 1 dB for
each pass through the circulator, but this only happens
once independently of the number of storage cycles. We
can still observe detection events following retrieval after
10 storage cycles, which corresponds to approximately 60
µs. The first storage peak in the graph corresponds to no
high-voltage driving pulse to the modulator (ϕ = 0), and
is used as a reference. We also plot in Fig. 4 the expected
performance if a commercial LiNbO3 phase modulator
would be used instead (typical 3 dB loss).

We then experimentally demonstrate the storage and
retrieval of polarisation-encoded weak coherent states.
The PBS at the measurement stage is reinstalled, and we
employ the half-wave plate θ in the beginning of the setup
to generate the superposition |ψinput⟩ = cos(2θ)|H⟩ +
sin(2θ)|V ⟩, where |H⟩ and |V ⟩ represent the horizontal
and vertical polarisation states respectively. We then
sweep θ and thus, for each input state, the counts at the
PBS outputs are recorded over 30 s, for 5 different storage
cycles, the last one corresponding to 47 µs. This exper-
iment was done for the two mutually unbiased polari-
sation measurement bases used in QKD BB84-protocols
[5], Z and X, which are changed using the manual po-
larisation controller before the PBS. The corresponding
polarisation curves for the nth storage cycle are presented
in figure 5a.

In Fig. 5b, we show the probabilities to detect each
of the four BB84 transmitted states by setting the input
polarisation state angle to θH,V = {0, 45} and θD,A =
{22.5, 67.5}, where the subscripts D and A correspond
to the superposition states |D⟩ = 1/
2(|H⟩ + |V ⟩) and
2(|H⟩ − |V ⟩). We then record the counts over
|A⟩ = 1/
the two measurement bases Z and X, corresponding to
the projections onto the |H⟩; |V ⟩ and |D⟩; |A⟩ states re-
spectively. The probability of detection for the |i⟩ state
is calculated as P|i⟩ = ND|i⟩/(ND|i⟩ + ND|i⟩⊥ ), where

√

√

5

Figure 4. Buffer efficiency. A payload of 16 weak coherent
states (WCSs) is stored in the buffer, and subsequently re-
trieved. We employ 0.1 photons per state on average (1.6
photons per payload) on the input of the buffer, to demon-
strate storage for typical weak coherent state amplitudes in
practical applications. The different curves corresponding up
to ten storage cycles are obtained individually for each delay
of the retrieval high voltage pulse, and acquired with a time
tagger. They are then all plotted superposed on the figure.
The green data points represent the average detected single-
photon counts for all the 16 WCSs for that particular storage
loop, and the green curve is an exponential decay fit. We also
show for reference in the red curve, the expected performance
if a commercial LiNbO3 phase modulator is used instead of
the poled fibre modulator. The insets zoom in on the last
three storage cycles showing the individual detected counts
for each WCS.

ND|i⟩ and ND|i⟩⊥ correspond to the number of detections
on the matching and on the orthogonal detector respec-
tively, for the |i⟩ input state. The quantum bit error rate
(QBER) is then written as QBER = 1 − P|i⟩, and we cal-
culated it from the detection probabilities in Fig. 5b for
the different storage times respectively as 1.06 ± 0.04%,
1.11 ± 0.08%, 1.46 ± 0.13%, 2.74 ± 0.39%, 2.29 ± 0.55%
respectively.

We next evaluate the long-term stability of the buffer
by continuously monitoring the QBER for a fixed input
state, (|H⟩). The measurement sequence starts at the
first storage cycle, then proceeds to cycles n=3 and n=6,
before returning to n=1. For this stability measurement,
the mean input photon number is increased to 1.0, since
the focus is on temporal stability. The main source of in-
stability is the residual time-dependent birefringence of
the optical fibre, which slowly changes the polarisation
state reaching the measurement PBS. For each storage
cycle, data is acquired for 30 s. At the start of each mea-
surement round, the computer connected to the time tag-
ger calculates the current detection probability (P|H⟩).
If P|H⟩ < 95%, corresponding to a QBER above 5%, the
measurement is paused and an automatic recalibration
routine is initiated. This recalibration is performed us-

51015202530354045505560Time [s]020040060080010001200Counts/(1min)Cycle 1Cycle 1002501005Exponential FitLiNbO3 modulatorExponential FitAverage Counts6

Figure 5. Quantum information storage. a) Normalised single-photon detection following the projective polarisation measure-
ment in the measurement stage for different storage times, up to a maximum n = 8 corresponding to 47 µs. It is carried out as
a function of the input half-wave plate angle (θ) in the superposition |ψinput⟩ = cos(2θ)|H⟩ + sin(2θ)|V ⟩. For each storage cycle
we project the state |ψinput⟩ over the two mutually unbiased bases used in BB84 QKD, the computational (Z) and the logical
(X) bases. The integration time for each data point is 30 secs. Error bars come from the assumption that each detection event
is governed by Poissonian statistics. b) We show the corresponding detection probabilities for each storage cycle number, by
preparing each of the four prepared BB84 states and projecting onto each of the same four states, simulating a QKD protocol
for different storage times, with an average QBER of 1.85 ± 0.13% over all cycles.

ing an all-fibre voltage-operated polarisation controller
(VOPC) with 0.2 dB insertion loss, which realigns the
polarisation state of the retrieved weak coherent states
with the PBS before data acquisition resumes. The pro-
cedure typically takes a few minutes, depending on the
initial polarisation condition. The longest storage case is
the most sensitive to residual birefringence, as expected,
because of the longer fibre propagation distance. Such
automatic polarisation stabilisation is routinely used in
fibre-based experiments and commercial QKD systems.
The results, shown in Fig. 6, demonstrate stable long-
term operation over more than 12 hours.

Finally, to demonstrate the full functionality of the
buffer, we show processing of a header determining how
long the payload should be stored, emulating the scenario
in Fig. 1. The header is added as three extra pulses to the
beginning of the 16 weak coherent state payload, allowing
the encoding of up to eight different addresses, assuming
direct digital amplitude modulation. The central node
then decides on the delay to be applied for each packet,
depending on the destination address. In our proof-of-
principle implementation, we map each header value to a
different delay in terms of the storage cycle number. The
header has a much higher average photon number com-
pared to the payload, ensuring the header is successfully
read out by the SNSPDs. Note that in an intermediate
node in a network, simpler gated-mode avalanche diode-
based single-photon detectors could be used to read out
the header, or even high-sensitivity photo-receivers if the
header intensity is tuned to be sufficiently high. The full
packet structure is created from an arbitrary waveform

Figure 6. Long-term stability of the buffer. QBER for detect-
ing the state |H⟩ on basis Z as a function of time for different
storage cycles. Error bars come from the assumption that
each detection event is governed by Poissonian statistics.

generator producing the desired driving pulses to the am-
plitude modulator at the output of the laser.

The possibility of performing real-time packet process-
ing requires fast response times given the cumulative de-
coherence or loss probability as a function of storage time
in a quantum memory. The poled fibre phase modulator
also satisfies this strict requirement, allowing us to split
the header from the payload without any need for addi-

0/4/20.01.00.5Norm. Countsa)b)n=10/4/20.01.00.5n=30/4/2HWP setting0.01.00.5n=40/4/20.01.00.5n=60/4/20.01.00.5n=8LegendD1 Z-BasisD2 Z-BasisD1 X-BasisD2 X-Basis|H|V|D|A|H|V|D|APreparation|H|V|D|A|H|V|D|A|H|V|D|AProjection|H|V|D|A|H|V|D|A|H|V|D|A|H|V|D|A|H|V|D|A0.00.51.0024681012Time [h]012345QBER [%]Loop 1Loop 3Loop 67

of-principle platform can be further improved in terms
of losses, by approximately 1.1 dB per pass through the
replacement of four FC/PC connectors inside the Sagnac
loop with fibre splices (1.0 dB), and a fibre coupler with
lower excess losses (0.1 dB), thus improving the overall
transmissivity per storage cycle to 72%. This value can
be slightly different depending on the fibre delay values,
which will be determined by the desired packet length.

Since the buffer is designed to process entire packets,
much denser payloads and headers are possible by using
much narrower and closely packed pulse widths, without
degrading the performance of the storage. For instance,
recent results have shown the use of 45 ps wide pulses
with 400 ps separation [55]. The repetition rate of the
buffer can be greatly improved by employing DC sources
with higher current limits or a pulse generator capable
of directly driving high-impedance capacitive loads [56].
Furthermore, our companion submission [43] has demon-
strated repetition rates of 100 kHz, using a poled fibre
modulator with smaller Vπ and shorter pulse widths,
thus confirming the potential of the device for practical
quantum information processing tasks.

The results obtained are also the first to use poled
fibre electro-optical modulation technology for applica-
tions in quantum information processing. The fast speed,
low insertion loss and direct optical fibre compatibility
make it very attractive for demanding applications such
as device-independent quantum communication imple-
mentations, where low losses and high speeds for appli-
cation of different measurement settings are crucial [57].
Furthermore, the polarisation independence of the device
opens further possibilities, such as, in higher-dimensional
hybrid entanglement processing where polarisation is one
of the degrees-of-freedom [58].

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We acknowledge helpful discussions with Alvaro
Alarc´on, Walter Margulis, Sebastian Etcheverry, Gus-
tavo do Amaral and Guilherme Tempor˜ao. We ac-
knowledge financing from Vinnova (project no. 2023-
01358), the Wallenberg Center for Quantum Technolo-
gies (WACQT) and the project “DIGITAL-2022-QCI-02-
DEPLOY-NATIONAL” (Project number: 101113375 -
NQCIS National Quantum Communication in Sweden)
funded by the European Union together with Vinnova
and the Wallenberg Centre for Quantum Technology
(WACQT).

tional time separation between the header and payload.
The results are shown in Fig. 7, where we see the time-
of-arrival events acquired from the time-tagger for each
number of different storage cycles with the corresponding
header already split. We show a copy of the full packet
before reaching the buffer (red shaded region), using a 10
: 90 splitter (not shown for simplicity) and the SNSPD.
The header is then split off from the payload (blue shaded
region), which stays in the loop and proceeds for another
round. The header information containing the 3-bit bi-
nary word corresponding to the desired delay sets the de-
lay of the applied retrieval pulse. The different retrieval
times for each payload are shown in the green area.

Figure 8 places our buffer in the broader landscape
of room-temperature quantum matter memories [50–54]
and photonic recirculating loop platforms. We compare
the effective qubit yield, which we define as Y = η N ,
where N is the number of stored qubits and η the storage
efficiency per loop (or equivalently the total efficiency in
the case of matter memories [50–54]). It quantifies the ex-
pected number of qubits recovered per storage event. In
our case, through the storage and retrieval of a 16-qubit
packet at ∼ 56% per-cycle efficiency, our buffer reaches
Y ≈ 9 qubit yield, overcoming the best previous result
by nearly an order of magnitude.

DISCUSSION

As point-to-point quantum communication protocols
get more sophisticated the focus begins to shift to net-
working applications.
In spite of significant proof-of-
principle experiments over the years to implement dif-
ferent networking protocols and primitives, a quantum
buffering device capable of real-time packet processing
is still missing. Furthermore, for such a buffer to be of
more practical value, it should be easy to integrate with
current telecom networking hardware.

Here we are able to demonstrate such a buffer. Our
approach was done at the critical telecom spectral win-
dow, allowing full compatibility with current systems.
We implement a loop memory based configuration us-
ing a Sagnac interferometer which controls the storage of
the quantum states in a storage line comprised of a fibre
delay and a fibre Bragg grating, operating as a mirror.
A major differentiator of our implementation compared
with previous demonstrations is the use of a poled fi-
bre phase modulator, allowing our platform to be fully
fibre-based with fast response times, critical for packet-
processed quantum networks. Additionally, compared to
typical commercial fibre pigtailed modulators, our device
offers much lower insertion loss as well as low polarisa-
tion dependence, properties which have prevented previ-
ous experiments from reaching the stringent performance
requirements for a practical quantum internet.

These first results are very promising as they do not
require cryogenic systems, or complex and sensitive in-
terfaces between free-space and fibre-optics. Our proof-

8

Figure 7. Quantum packet processing. The packet consists of a header containing three strong pulses, and the payload consists
of 16 weak coherent states. The panels from top to bottom correspond to storage cycles of n = {2, 3, 4, 6} respectively. On the
left the red shaded waveform shows a copy of the packet before entering to the memory. The insets zoom in on the full packet
before processing (red region), then the header after being split off from the payload (blue region) and the payload after being
appropriately delayed (green region). Please see the text for further details. The different encoding values for the header can
be seen based on on/off encoding for each respective delay for the payload on the insets.

0510152025303540Time [s]0200004000060000n=20500Input packageHeader ReadoutPayload Readout0510152025303540Time [s]0200004000060000n=30500Input packageHeader ReadoutPayload Readout0510152025303540Time [s]0200004000060000n=40500Input packageHeader ReadoutPayload Readout0510152025303540Time [s]0200004000060000n=60500Input packageHeader ReadoutPayload ReadoutCounts/(4mins)9

Figure 8. Effective qubit yield of room-temperature quantum
memories and photonic buffers. For each platform we plot the
effective qubit yield Y = ηN , which represents the expected
number of qubits retrieved per storage event vs. the maxi-
mum reported storage time. Loop memories consist of active
recirculating memories while matter memories are included
as a comparison, since they allow continuous on-demand re-
trieval. For the loop memories, we compare the different ef-
ficiencies per loop pass, while for matter memories we report
the total efficiency. The efficiencies per cycle for references
[31–33] were not explicitly given and were thus inferred from
the experimental data provided.

103102101100101102Maximum reported storage time [s]101100101Qubit yield[22][50][24][51][52][31][34][53][32][33][54][36][35]This workLoop memoryMatter memoryThis Work[1] H. J. Kimble, The quantum internet, Nature 453, 1023

(2008).

[2] S. Wehner, D. Elkouss, and R. Hanson, Quantum inter-
net: A vision for the road ahead, Science 362, eaam9288
(2018).

[3] N. Gisin and R. Thew, Quantum communication, Nature

Photonics 1, 165 (2007).

[4] S. Pirandola, U. L. Andersen, L. Banchi, M. Berta,
D. Bunandar, R. Colbeck, D. Englund, T. Gehring,
C. Lupo, C. Ottaviani, J. L. Pereira, et al., Advances
in quantum cryptography, Advances in Optics and Pho-
tonics 12, 1012 (2020).

[5] C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, Quantum cryptography:
Public key distribution and coin tossing, in Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Computers, Sys-
tems and Signal Processing (Bangalore, India, 1984) pp.
175–179.

[6] A. K. Ekert, Quantum cryptography based on bell’s the-

orem, Physical Review Letters 67, 661 (1991).

[7] H.-K. Lo, M. Curty, and B. Qi, Measurement-device-
independent quantum key distribution, Physical Review
Letters 108, 130503 (2012).

[8] M. Lucamarini, Z. L. Yuan, J. F. Dynes, and A. J.
Shields, Overcoming the rate–distance limit of quantum
key distribution without quantum repeaters, Nature 557,
400 (2018).

[9] S.-K. Liao, W.-Q. Cai, W.-Y. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Li, J.-G.
Ren, J. Yin, Q. Shen, Y. Cao, Z.-P. Li, et al., Satellite-to-
ground quantum key distribution, Nature 549, 43 (2017).
[10] J. Yin, Y. Cao, Y.-H. Li, S.-K. Liao, L. Zhang, J.-G. Ren,
W.-Q. Cai, W.-Y. Liu, B. Li, H. Dai, et al., Satellite-
based entanglement distribution over 1200 kilometers,
Science 356, 1140 (2017).

[11] L. Zhou, J. Lin, C. Ge, Y. Fan, Z. Yuan, H. Dong,
Y. Liu, D. Ma, J.-P. Chen, C. Jiang, X.-B. Wang, L.-X.
You, Q. Zhang, and J.-W. Pan, Independent Optical Fre-
quency Combs Powered 546 km Field Test of Twin-Field
Quantum Key Distribution, Physical Review Applied 22,
064057 (2024).

[12] M. Pittaluga, Y. S. Lo, A. Brzosko, R. I. Woodward,
D. Scalcon, M. S. Winnel, T. Roger, J. F. Dynes,
K. A. Owen, S. Ju´arez, P. Rydlichowski, D. Vicinanza,
G. Roberts, and A. J. Shields, Long-distance coherent
quantum communications in deployed telecom networks,
Nature 640, 911 (2025).

[13] M. Pompili, C. Delle Donne, I. te Raa, B. van der Vecht,
M. Skrzypczyk, G. Ferreira, L. de Kluijver, A. J. Stolk,
S. L. N. Hermans, P. Pawe(cid:32)lczak, W. Kozlowski, R. Han-
son, and S. Wehner, Experimental demonstration of en-
tanglement delivery using a quantum network stack, npj
Quantum Information 8, 121 (2022).

[14] S. DiAdamo, B. Qi, G. Miller, R. Kompella, and A. Sha-
bani, Packet switching in quantum networks: A path to
the quantum internet, Phys. Rev. Res. 4, 043064 (2022).
[15] R. Mandil, S. DiAdamo, B. Qi, and A. Shabani, Quan-
tum key distribution in a packet-switched network, npj
Quantum Information 9, 85 (2023).

[16] S. J. Ben Yoo, S. K. Singh, M. B. On, G. G¨ul, G. S. Kan-
ter, R. Proietti, and P. Kumar, Quantum wrapper net-
working, IEEE Communications Magazine 62, 76 (2024).

10

[17] A. I. Lvovsky, B. C. Sanders, and W. Tittel, Optical
quantum memory, Nature Photonics 3, 706 (2009).
[18] K. Heshami, D. G. England, P. C. Humphreys, P. J.
Bustard, V. M. Acosta, J. Nunn, and B. J. Sussman,
Quantum memories: emerging applications and recent
advances, Journal of Modern Optics 63, 2005 (2016).
[19] F. Bussi`eres, N. Sangouard, M. Afzelius, H. de Riedmat-
ten, C. Simon, and W. Tittel, Prospective applications
of optical quantum memories, Journal of Modern Optics
60, 1519 (2013).

[20] A. Ortu, A. Holz¨apfel, J. Etesse, and M. Afzelius, Storage
of photonic time-bin qubits for up to 20 ms in a rare-earth
doped crystal, npj Quantum Information 8, 29 (2022).

[21] S. Duranti, S. Wengerowsky, L. Feldmann, A. Seri,
B. Casabone, and H. de Riedmatten, Efficient cavity-
assisted storage of photonic qubits in a solid-state quan-
tum memory, Optics Express 32, 26884 (2024).

[22] T. B. Pittman and J. D. Franson, Cyclical quantum mem-
ory for photonic qubits, Phys. Rev. A 66, 062302 (2002).
[23] K. Makino, Y. Hashimoto, J. ichi Yoshikawa, H. Ohdan,
T. Toyama, P. van Loock, and A. Furusawa, Synchro-
nization of optical photons for quantum information pro-
cessing, Science Advances 2, e1501772 (2016).

[24] F. Kaneda, F. Xu, J. Chapman, and P. G. Kwiat,
Quantum-memory-assisted multi-photon generation for
efficient quantum information processing, Optica 4, 1034
(2017).

[25] F. Kaneda and P. G. Kwiat, High-efficiency single-photon
generation via large-scale active time multiplexing, Sci-
ence Advances 5, eaaw8586 (2019).

[26] E. Meyer-Scott, N. Prasannan, I. Dhand, C. Eigner,
V. Quiring, S. Barkhofen, B. Brecht, M. B. Plenio, and
C. Silberhorn, Scalable generation of multiphoton en-
tangled states by active feed-forward and multiplexing,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, 150501 (2022).

[27] Z. Hou, J.-F. Tang, C.-J. Huang, Y.-F. Huang, G.-Y.
Xiang, C.-F. Li, and G.-C. Guo, Entangled-state time
multiplexing for multiphoton entanglement generation,
Phys. Rev. Appl. 19, L011002 (2023).

[28] L. T. Weinbrenner, N. Prasannan, K. Hansenne,
S. Denker, J. Sperling, B. Brecht, C. Silberhorn, and
O. G¨uhne, Certifying the topology of quantum networks:
Theory and experiment, Phys. Rev. Lett. 132, 240802
(2024).

[29] F. Hanamura, K. Takase, K. Hirota, R. Nehra, F. Lang,
S. Miki, H. Terai, M. Yabuno, T. Kashiwazaki, A. In-
oue, T. Umeki, W. Asavanant, M. Endo, J.-i. Yoshikawa,
and A. Furusawa, Scalable optical quantum state synthe-
sizer with dual-mode resonator memory, PRX Quantum
6, 040336 (2025).

[30] X.-L. Pang, C.-N. Zhang, J.-P. Dou, H. Li, T.-H. Yang,
and X.-M. Jin, Entangling motional atoms and an optical
loop at ambient condition, npj Quantum Information 9,
62 (2023).

[31] K. A. G. Bonsma-Fisher, C. Hnatovsky, D. Grobnic,
S. J. Mihailov, P. J. Bustard, D. G. England, and B. J.
Sussman, Fiber-integrated quantum memory for telecom
light, Phys. Rev. A 108, 012606 (2023).

[32] K. A. G. Bonsma-Fisher, R. Tannous, D. Poitras, C. Hna-
tovsky, S. J. Mihailov, P. J. Bustard, D. G. England, and
B. J. Sussman, Storage of telecom wavelength heralded

single photons in a fiber cavity quantum memory, Optica
Quantum 2, 41 (2024).

[33] K. Fook Lee, G. G¨ul, Z. Jim, and P. Kumar, Fiber
loop quantum buffer for photonic qubits, New Journal
of Physics 26, 083011 (2024).

[34] C. J. Evans, C. M. Nunn, S. W. L. Cheng, J. D. Franson,
and T. B. Pittman, Experimental storage of photonic po-
larization entanglement in a broadband loop-based quan-
tum memory, Phys. Rev. A 108, L050601 (2023).
[35] S. Cheng, C. Evans, and T. Pittman, Fiber-coupled
broadband quantum memory for polarization-encoded
photonic qubits, npj Quantum Information 11, 163
(2025).

[36] M.-S. Sun, C.-H. Zhang, Y.-Z. Luo, S. Wang, Y. Liu,
J. Li, and Q. Wang, On-demand storing time-bin qubit
states with optical quantum memory, Applied Physics
Letters 126, 104001 (2025).

[37] A. Alarc´on, P. Gonz´alez, J. Cari˜ne, G. Lima, and G. B.
Xavier, Polarization-independent single-photon switch
based on a fiber-optical sagnac interferometer for quan-
tum communication networks, Optics Express 28, 33731
(2020).

[38] R. A. Myers, N. Mukherjee, and S. R. J. Brueck, Large
second-order nonlinearity in poled fused silica, Optics
Letters 16, 1732 (1991).

[39] P. G. Kazansky, P. S. J. Russell, and H. Takebe, Glass
fiber poling and applications, Journal of Lightwave Tech-
nology 15, 1484 (1997).

[40] T. Fujiwara, D. Wong, Y. Zhao, S. Fleming, S. Poole, and
M. Sceats, Electro-optic modulation in germanosilicate
fibre with uv-excited poling, Electronics Letters 31, 573
(1995).

[41] M. Fokine, L. E. Nilsson, ˚A. Claesson, D. Berlemont,
L. Kjellberg, L. Krummenacher, and W. Margulis, In-
tegrated fiber mach–zehnder interferometer for electro-
optic switching, Optics Letters 27, 1643 (2002).

[42] D. Spegel-Lexne, J. M. B. Pereira, A. Alarc´on,
J. Argillander, M. Clason, ˚A. Claesson, K. H. Tow,
W. Margulis, and G. B. Xavier, Storage buffer of po-
larization quantum states based on a poled-fiber phase
modulator, in CLEO 2025 (Optica Publishing Group,
2025) p. FF115 4.

[43] N. Guerrero, N. Villalva, G. H. dos Santos, C. J. Salazar,
C. Melo, F. Castillo, J. Cari˜ne, G. B. Xavier, E. S.
G´omez, S. P. Walborn, J. Pereira, G. Saavedra, and
G. Lima, Poled-fibre phase modulator for efficient high-
dimensional quantum measurements, Submitted com-
panion manuscript (2026).

[44] A. R. Camara, J. M. B. Pereira, O. Tarasenko, W. Mar-
gulis, and I. C. S. Carvalho, Optical creation and erasure
of the linear electrooptical effect in silica fiber, Opt. Ex-
press 23, 18060 (2015).

[45] A. Alarc´on, J. Argillander, D. Spegel-Lexne, and G. B.
Xavier, Dynamic generation of photonic spatial quantum
states with an all-fiber platform, Opt. Express 31, 10673
(2023).

[46] D.

S. G´omez,

Spegel-Lexne,

J. Argillander,
M. Paw(cid:32)lowski, P. R. Dieguez, A. Alarc´on, and G. B.
Xavier, Experimental demonstration of the equivalence
of entropic uncertainty with wave-particle duality,

11

Science Advances 10, eadr2007 (2024).

[47] C. Raj, T. Prasad, A. Chaturvedi, L. Pollyceno,
D. Spegel-Lexne, S. G´omez, J. Argillander, A. Alarc´on,
G. B. Xavier, M. Paw(cid:32)lowski, and P. R. Dieguez, Certi-
fying semi-device-independent security via wave-particle
duality experiments, npj Quantum Information 12, 7
(2025).

[48] J. Argillander, D. Spegel-Lexne, M. Clason, P. R.
Dieguez, M. Paw(cid:32)lowski, A. Chaturvedi, and G. B. Xavier,
High-dimensional detection-loophole-free measurement-
device-independent quantum random number generator
(2025), arXiv:2510.06317 [quant-ph].

[49] K. Vijayadharan, M. R. Bola˜nos, M. Avesani, G. Val-
lone, P. Villoresi, and C. Agnesi, A sagnac-based arbi-
trary time-bin state encoder for quantum communication
applications, EPJ Quantum Technology 12, 129 (2025).
[50] K. F. Reim, P. Michelberger, K. C. Lee, J. Nunn, N. K.
Langford, and I. A. Walmsley, Single-photon-level quan-
tum memory at room temperature, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107,
053603 (2011).

[51] R. Finkelstein, E. Poem, O. Michel, O. Lahad, and
O. Firstenberg, Fast, noise-free memory for photon syn-
chronization at room temperature, Science Advances 4,
eaap8598 (2018).

[52] K. T. Kaczmarek, P. M. Ledingham, B. Brecht, S. E.
Thomas, G. S. Thekkadath, O. Lazo-Arjona, J. H. D.
Munns, E. Poem, A. Feizpour, D. J. Saunders, J. Nunn,
and I. A. Walmsley, High-speed noise-free optical quan-
tum memory, Phys. Rev. A 97, 042316 (2018).

[53] S. E. Thomas,

S. Sagona-Stophel, Z. Schofield,
I. A. Walmsley, and P. M. Ledingham, Single-photon-
compatible telecommunications-band quantum memory
in a hot atomic gas, Phys. Rev. Appl. 19, L031005 (2023).
[54] S. E. Thomas, L. Wagner, R. Joos, R. Sittig, C. Nawrath,
P. Burdekin, I. M. de Buy Wenniger, M. J. Rasiah,
T. Huber-Loyola, S. Sagona-Stophel, S. H¨ofling, M. Jet-
ter, P. Michler, I. A. Walmsley, S. L. Portalupi, and P. M.
Ledingham, Deterministic storage and retrieval of tele-
com light from a quantum dot single-photon source in-
terfaced with an atomic quantum memory, Science Ad-
vances 10, eadi7346 (2024).

[55] F. Gr¨unenfelder, A. Boaron, G. V. Resta, M. Perrenoud,
D. Rusca, C. Barreiro, R. Houlmann, R. Sax, L. Stasi,
S. El-Khoury, E. H¨anggi, N. Bosshard, F. Bussi`eres, and
H. Zbinden, Fast single-photon detectors and real-time
key distillation enable high secret-key-rate quantum key
distribution systems, Nature Photonics 17, 422 (2023).

[56] Y. Xu, W. Chen, H. Liang, Y.-H. Li, F.-T. Liang,
Q. Shen, S.-K. Liao, and C.-Z. Peng, Megahertz high
voltage pulse generator suitable for capacitive load, AIP
Advances 7, 115210 (2017).

[57] G. B. Xavier, J.-˚A. Larsson, P. Villoresi, G. Vallone,
and A. Cabello, Energy-time and time-bin entanglement:
past, present and future, npj Quantum Information 11,
129 (2025).

[58] Z.-Q. Zhong, X.-H. Zhan, J.-L. Chen, S. Wang, Z.-Q.
Yin, J.-Q. Geng, D.-Y. He, W. Chen, G.-C. Guo, and
Z.-F. Han, Hyperentanglement quantum communication
over a 50 km noisy fiber channel, Optica 11, 1056 (2024).

