Rate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

CONNOR CLAYTON, University of Maryland
CORY NUNN, National Institute of Standards and Technology; University of Maryland
QUINN CARMACK, University of Maryland
WAYNE MCKENZIE, Laboratory for Telecommunication Sciences
ANNE MARIE RICHARDS, Laboratory for Telecommunication Sciences
XIAODI WU, University of Maryland
BOBBY BHATTACHARJEE, University of Maryland

Quantum network links must distribute entanglement at high rates while satisfying application-specified
fidelity demands. However, wide-area deployed fiber links suffer from polarization drift which destabilizes
end-to-end fidelity and forces periodic compensation. Current deployments often use active stabilization with
fixed control policies, and improvements generally stem from advances in quantum hardware. Meanwhile,
software control remains relatively underexplored.

Here, we formulate quantum link operation as a joint control problem over tunable rate-fidelity tradeoffs and
uncontrollable link drift. From this framework, we construct a link control protocol that dynamically adapts
source pump power and polarization compensation to maximize entanglement distribution rate subject to a
minimum fidelity constraint. We evaluate the protocol through trace-driven simulations driven by data from a
64 km deployed optical fiber. Compared with optimized static policies, our adaptive controller improves mean
entanglement distribution rate by 14% over a 24 hour trace, without requiring any offline policy optimization.
Our results show that software-based physical layer control can provide a practical mechanism for improving
near-term quantum link performance without requiring additional quantum hardware.

1 INTRODUCTION
Quantum networks promise to provide revolutionary capabilities in areas such as secure communi-
cations [5, 16], distributed quantum sensing [17, 19], and modular quantum computing [1, 32]. To
realize the utility of these technologies, quantum network architectures and protocols must scale
both in terms of geographic distance and quality of information transfer [47].

The scaling of these metrics are at odds with each other. Information in a quantum network exists
in the form of quantum bits (qubits) whose signals are necessarily weak, with each transmitted qubit
generally consisting of a single photon. Quantum communication is therefore highly susceptible to
loss and noise, both of which scale unfavorably with increasing distance.

Most applications of quantum networks require the distribution of high-quality entanglement
between remote parties. Entanglement is a property of two or more qubits that allows for correla-
tions even across large distances. The quality of an entangled quantum system can be measured by
its fidelity 𝐹 , where 0 ≤ 𝐹 ≤ 1 and 𝐹 = 1 indicates that the system is in the “ideal” target state. In
practice, system imperfections and environmental noise cause 𝐹 to be less than 1; however, such
noisy states are often sufficient and a higher-fidelity state may be attained by consuming many
noisy copies through a process known as entanglement distillation [21].

Significant efforts are underway to design, develop, test, and deploy hardware components which
will enable high-fidelity transmission of entanglement [6, 24, 29]. Concurrently, considerable effort
has been put into developments at higher layers of the quantum protocol stack [22] which manage

Authors’ Contact Information: Connor Clayton, cbclayto@cs.umd.edu, University of Maryland; Cory Nunn, cory.nunn@nist.
gov, National Institute of Standards and Technology; University of Maryland; Quinn Carmack, qcarmack@terpmail.umd.edu,
University of Maryland; Wayne McKenzie, wmckenzie@ltsnet.net, Laboratory for Telecommunication Sciences; Anne Marie
Richards, arichards@ltsnet.net, Laboratory for Telecommunication Sciences; Xiaodi Wu, xwu@cs.umd.edu, University of
Maryland; Bobby Bhattacharjee, bobby@cs.umd.edu, University of Maryland.

arXiv:2608.07163v1  [quant-ph]  7 Aug 20262

Connor Clayton et al.

resources to deliver entanglement in complex networks [9, 12, 13, 42, 46]. However, there is a gap in
the current research landscape: most protocols for wide-area quantum networks generally assume
high-volume, consistent-fidelity entanglement generation — conditions that the physical layer is
not expected to meet in the near- to medium-term [29].

We propose a framework for considering optimization problems relevant to the performance
of present-day quantum networks. The family of optimization problems we define here accounts
for both controllable parameters of quantum link hardware, which admit tradeoffs between fidelity
and performance metrics like entanglement distribution rate, and uncontrollable parameters that
diminish link fidelity, such as polarization drift. Neither set of parameters has been systematically
analyzed for wide-area links, especially in conjunction. We introduce an optimization problem that
considers both sets of parameters simultaneously, and present a link control protocol that tunes the
controllable parameters and adapts to the uncontrollable to achieve high entanglement distribution
rates over a wide-area link.

Our adaptive control protocol takes as input an end-to-end entanglement fidelity target, and
aims to maximize the entanglement distribution rate over the link. Absent link degradation, the
entanglement rate can be easily maximized with a proper selection of controllable parameters.
However, in a realistic wide-area setting, physical properties and environmental factors (e.g.,
temperature, cloud cover, wind) degrade entanglement in volatile ways. Our protocol queries a
pre-built model of link degradation to try to predict how the link will behave, and then sets the
controllable parameters to compensate for the expected degradation.

Our main result is a classical control protocol that boosts the practical utility of wide-area
quantum links by maximizing the rate of entanglement distribution at a consistent, user-defined
fidelity. The protocol requires no additional quantum hardware and introduces minimal classical
overhead. To make things concrete, we analyze an instance of our protocol based around a 64-km
deployed fiber in a major metropolitan area of the US (specific location omitted for anonymity
during double-blind review). Our link layer protocol directly benefits wide-area quantum networks
based on quantum repeaters, as these networks operate by swapping elementary entanglements
and therefore the rate and fidelity of each physical hop directly constrains end-to-end performance.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: we introduce relevant hardware properties and
discuss the specific quantum hardware used in our experiments in Section 2. In Section 3, we
present modeling of the components used by our adaptive protocol. Section 4 introduces a sequence
of optimization problems that decompose different aspects of entanglement distribution, while
Section 5 describes the control protocol itself. Section 6 evaluates the protocol against existing
techniques, Section 7 discusses generalization to other hardware and higher network layers, and
Section 8 concludes.

2 ENTANGLEMENT DISTRIBUTION AT THE PHYSICAL LAYER
The elementary unit of a quantum network is a physical link that generates and transmits entan-
glement. The hardware involved in this point-to-point entanglement distribution consists of a
source, link, and receiver, and is directly relevant for applications like entanglement-based quantum
key distribution [40], sensing, and metrology [50], wherein the receiver immediately character-
izes entangled states. This framework can be extended to more sophisticated link models, like
those in future quantum repeater networks, which rely on additional technologies like quantum
memories [48].

2.1 Entanglement Sources
An entanglement source is a device capable of generating pairs of entangled qubits. For long-
distance quantum communication, information is encoded into one of many physical degrees

Rate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

3

of freedom within individual photons. These “flying qubits” must be generated with dedicated
quantum hardware.

Entanglement can be generated via clever manipulation of individual qubits from single-photon
sources (as in [14]), or from sources that natively produce entangled photon pairs. In practice,
entanglement generation is typically a probabilistic process, though technology for on-demand,
deterministic sources is improving [15, 29]. Sources can be characterized in part by their photon
generation rate, single-photon purity (quantifying the degree of errant multi-photon emission),
and the resulting quantum state fidelity [7].

Many source properties are fixed during the engineering process; however, these systems still
typically allow some degree of tunability. In this work, we consider a simple example of modulating
the pump laser power for a source based on spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC);
details are covered in Section 3.1. Sources based on four-wave mixing or emission from solid state
quantum memories also often exhibit tunability via pump laser power. Additional examples of
controllable parameters include central wavelength and bandwidth temperature tuning for both
SPDC and quantum dot sources.

2.2 Quantum Receivers
Once an entangled qubit reaches its destination, the information may be stored, measured, or
processed through some logical operation. Ubiquitous across all receiver operations is the single-
photon detector, a device capable of identifying the presence of individual photons [7].

Single-photon detectors are characterized by their efficiency and dark count rate (among other
measures) which indicate the true-positive and false-positive rate of photon detection, respectively.
State-of-the-art performance is achieved using superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors
(SNSPDs), reaching upwards of 98% efficiency at standard telecom wavelengths [30, 39].

Similar to sources, detectors can offer some degree of tunability. For example, SNSPD bias current
can be adjusted to achieve (limited) increased detector efficiency. This comes at the expense of
increased dark counts, but may still yield an overall advantage in some applications [34]. Addi-
tional tradeoffs can be introduced in the processing of photodetection signals, such as tuning the
“coincidence window” to qualify the simultaneity of detection events [37], or the duration of a
measurement for state characterization, trading integration time for reduced statistical uncertainty.

2.3 Polarization Drift Across a Link
Ideal quantum channels would perfectly preserve quantum states between source and receiver, but
real-world links invariably introduce some degree loss and decoherence of quantum information
as photons interact with the environment.

A central characteristic of optical communication, classical or quantum, is polarization. Physically,
polarization describes the direction of oscillating electromagnetic fields that comprise light. For
most quantum networking purposes, maintaining consistent polarization between all parties is
strictly required, especially when the polarization itself encodes the quantum information. This
poses a great challenge for transmission over realistic quantum links, whereby polarization state
fidelities inevitably decay without intervention.

The objective of polarization stabilization is to ensure a photon’s state of polarization (SOP)
remains unchanged from source to receiver. For our purposes, the SOP can be described by three
parameters (𝑆1, 𝑆2, 𝑆3) which define a unit vector known as a Stokes vector. The received vector
(cid:174)𝑣 ′ = (𝑆 ′
3) will be altered by optical fiber imperfections and environmental conditions. These
1
can also change over time — a phenomenon known as polarization drift. While the magnitude of (cid:174)𝑣 ′

, 𝑆 ′
2

, 𝑆 ′

4

Connor Clayton et al.

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of our quantum link. Entanglement generation and automated polarization compensation
(APC) signals are time multiplexed. Measurements at the APC receiver inform corrections at the polarization
controller. (b) Feedback loop used for link control. Polarization fidelity (𝐹pol) measured by the APC acts as
input to the link control protocol and its associated models, which in turn determine hardware parameters at
the source site.

may change1, the most significant and dynamic changes are usually in the vector direction. The
angle between the desired and received vectors is the drift angle 𝜃 , from which the polarization
fidelity 𝐹pol is calculated [23]:

𝐹pol =

1
2

(1 + cos(𝜃 ))

(1)

The exact drift conditions are unique to each link, and can be highly variable over time depending
on the environment.

Significant effort goes into maintaining polarization over a quantum link. This process commonly
works by sending classical reference signals, measuring the change in polarization of those signals,
then applying a correction to offset this change [26, 28]. In the following subsection, we discuss a
commercial solution to polarization stabilization that operates on this principle.

2.4 Concrete Hardware Instance
To make the ideas of this paper concrete, we analyze a protocol instance based around hardware
available to us, described here and sketched in Figure 1. However, the same ideas extend naturally
to many other experimental setups, see Sections 2.5 and 7.2.

Our simulations are driven by polarization data gathered over a 64km quantum link in the the
Washington DC metropolitan quantum network (DC-QNet) [33]. The link consists of a 2km buried
optical fiber connecting the Laboratory for Telecommunication Sciences (LTS) to a switch at the
University of Maryland, which routes photons through a 62km partially-aerial fiber to the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Figure 2 sketches the route of this link. Transmission
loss over this fiber link was measured to be approximately 18dB. Over 70% of the fiber is aerial,
which leads to greater polarization instability compared to buried fiber due to its more direct
interaction with environmental changes.

A schematic of our entanglement source and detector setup is shown in Figure 3. Our source
of polarization-entangled photon pairs is based on SPDC, the most mature (and therefore widely-
deployed) class of sources used for quantum communications [15]. The power of the input pump
laser driving the source can be easily modulated to determine the rate and fidelity of entanglement
generation (see Section 3.1 and Figure 4a). A more detailed description and diagram can be found
in Appendix A.

Our receiver is comprised of a pair of polarization analyzers and SNSPDs (single-photon detec-
tors). The analyzers allow us to perform full quantum state characterization (tomography) on the

1via polarization-dependent loss or polarization mode dispersion [18].

APC SourceEntanglementSourceAPC ReceiverEntanglement ReceiverTwo-way SwitchTwo-way SwitchLink ControlProtocolSource/Detector ModelPolarization Prediction ModelLTSNISTFpolFpol! FsdFidelity check probe (Ftrigger, Ftarget, Ttimeout)Pump power(a)(b)64km fiber (>70% aerial)Polarization ControllerPolarization Feedback ControlRate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

5

Fig. 2. Metropolitan context of the 64km deployed fiber link, part of the Washington DC metropolitan
quantum network (DC-QNet). The source is located at the Laboratory for Telecommunication Sciences
(LTS) in College Park, MD, USA. The route passes through a switch at the University of Maryland, then
continues through a 62km partially-aerial fiber to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
in Gaithersburg, MD, USA. The exact routes of these two fibers are not known and therefore sketched as
straight dashed lines.

polarization-encoded photons emitted from the source [2]. From this, we compute the entanglement
fidelity to an ideal Bell state. Note that the procedure in Figure 3 depicts local characterization of
the source-receiver system. For entanglement distribution, one qubit is detected locally near the
source, while the other is instead measured at remote location across a fiber link (see Figure 1a).

2.4.1 Polarization Drift. In our experiments, polarization drift causes the fidelity 𝐹pol of our
polarization-encoded qubits to degrade over time. Our protocol relies on a sufficient understanding
of the rate of change in polarization (the “drift rate”) in order to make informed parameter adjustment
decisions. Figure 5 displays measured polarization drift over a 48 hour period over the link. The
plot shows the raw polarization Stokes parameters during this period with the distilled mean drift
rate | 𝑑𝜃
𝑑𝑡 | overlaid. Drift rates are strongly correlated with time of day, with significantly higher
drift over daytime hours.

VirginiaNISTGaithersburg62 km partially-aerial fiber (exact route unknown)University ofMaryland2 km buriedfiberWashington, DC© OpenStreetMap contributorsLTS6

Connor Clayton et al.

Fig. 3. Schematic of experimental setup used to characterize SPDC entanglement source and receiver with
controllable pump laser power. A complete diagram and its description can be found in Appendix A.

2.4.2 Polarization Compensator. During operation, the polarization drift on our link is measured
and corrected using a commercial2 Automated Polarization Compensation (APC) device [10]. The
APC measures polarization using in-band classical signals, meaning that no quantum data can be
transmitted while it is in operation. Figure 1a illustrates how the path must be fully switched away
from the entanglement source and detector while the APC is in use.

The APC may be probed at any time. On each probing, three parameters must be passed to the
device: (1) a triggering fidelity threshold 𝐹trigger, (2) a target fidelity threshold 𝐹target, and (3) a timeout
duration 𝑇timeout. When the APC is probed, it initiates a “fidelity check”. A fidelity check takes a
constant amount of time, 44ms for our link, and measures the current polarization fidelity 𝐹pol. If
𝐹pol > 𝐹trigger, the APC concludes operation and entanglement distribution resumes. However, if
𝐹pol ≤ 𝐹trigger, the device initiates a compensation routine, during which it adjusts the polarization
controller in an attempt to raise the polarization fidelity until 𝐹pol ≥ 𝐹target. This routine takes an
unspecified amount of time and is not guaranteed to succeed. If the target fidelity has not been met
after 𝑇timeout seconds, the routine aborts and entanglement distribution resumes.

2.5 Generality of the Control Abstraction
While the results in this paper are evaluated using a particular wide-area link with a particular
source, detector, and polarization controller, the control logic is defined over a hardware-agnostic
link interface. This interface consists of three replaceable components: (1) a set of controllable
hardware settings that define a tradeoff between entanglement generation rate and fidelity, (2) a
model for time-varying link degradation, and (3) a compensation mechanism and corresponding
model mapping corrective actions to expected fidelity improvement and overhead.

For the source-detector setup, the relevant requirement is a controllable rate-fidelity operating
frontier. In our evaluated system, pump power provides this control. Figure 4 shows this behavior for
our SPDC source and for a second commercial source based on four-wave mixing [11]. Four-wave
mixing probabilistically generates entangled photon pairs by a fundamentally different physical
mechanism than SPDC [15], yet importantly, both systems exemplify the same control abstraction:
increasing pump power increases the entanglement generation rate while reducing entanglement
fidelity over the operating regime.

Note, in addition, that our approach extends well beyond these examples. The same abstraction
encompasses many quantum memory-based links as well, with controllable rate-fidelity tradeoffs
common in links that entangle pairs of trapped ions [25], neutral atoms [38], and color centers in
diamond [12, 45]. In all these examples, the tradeoffs are modulated by source laser power; however,

2Commercial equipment and software referred to in this work is identified for informational purposes only, and does not
imply recommendation of or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the
products so identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose.

DetectorsRate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

7

(a) Characterization of an in-house entanglement
source based on spontaneous parametric down-
conversion (SPDC).

(b) Characterization of a commercial Qunnect Qu-
SRC entanglement source [11] based on four-wave
mixing.

Fig. 4. Controllable rate-fidelity tradeoffs across two entanglement source technologies. In both sources,
increasing pump power increases entanglement generation rate but reduces entanglement fidelity. The
simulations in this paper use the SPDC characterization in (a).

this need not be the case, as many other control knobs exist depending on source and detector
configurations. We list several such parameters in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. The protocol also does not
require the rate-fidelity relationship to be linear or one-dimensional, as the same role can be played
by any calibrated set of operating points, including a multidimensional Pareto front over rate and
fidelity.

On the link side, the relevant requirement is time-varying degradation that can be measured
or conservatively bounded over the control horizon, together with a corrective action that can
improve the link state at some cost. Polarization drift is a ubiquitous example of a link-degrading
phenomenon in optical quantum communication, and its magnitude depends on link-specific factors
such as length and deployment environment. These factors enter the protocol through the learned
drift model rather than through hardware-specific assumptions. A different deployment would
replace or update the training data and prediction model, but the structure of the controller remains
unchanged.

Similarly, our use of a commercial APC device is one instance of a more general compensation
primitive. The protocol’s only requirement is a way to estimate when compensation is worth its
cost through a sufficiently validated model. Other compensation hardware may expose different
parameters or incur different overheads, but these differences can be incorporated by reworking the
compensation response model. The APC model used in our simulator is therefore an instantiation
of this interface, not a protocol requirement.

3 MODELING THE EVALUATED QUANTUM LINK
We now instantiate the three required interfaces described in Section 2.5 for the deployed link used
in our evaluation by describing the modeling of relevant hardware components. These models

0.800.850.900.951.00Fidelity050100150200250300Pump Power (mW)0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized EntanglementGeneration Rate0.9800.9850.9900.9951.000Fidelity012345Pump Power (mW)0.20.40.60.81.0Normalized EntanglementGeneration Rate8

Connor Clayton et al.

Fig. 5. Measured polarization drift over 48 hours on a 64km fiber link. The top figure shows the evolution of
raw Stokes parameters over time; the bottom plot shows the calculated drift rate averaged over 15 minute
intervals. On average, drift is significantly higher during the day.

abstract the performance characteristics of each component and are used as input to our control
protocol described in Section 5.

3.1 Source-Detector Model
For the evaluated deployment, we instantiate the source-detector model using empirical data from
an SPDC source designed to produce polarization-entangled photon pairs. In Figure 4a, our source
is characterized for a range of input pump powers, from 25 to 300 mW. The upper subplot shows
the quantum state fidelity to an ideal Bell state, computed from the tomographic measurement
shown in Figure 3. The lower subplot shows the rate of coincident detection events at each of the
two SNSPDs, normalized to the maximum observed value. This rate depends on the efficiency of
the SPDC process, coupling into optical fiber, detector efficiency, and other link losses between
source and receiver. Details of the data in Figure 4a and its processing are given in Appendix B.

As pump power increases, the photon pair generation rate increases linearly in this regime.
However, due to the probabilistic nature of SPDC, increasing the probability of emission per each
laser pulse also increases multipair emission– the likelihood that more than one photon pair is
generated from a single pulse. This effectively adds noise and reduces the entanglement fidelity
𝐹sd, as the measured polarization correlations are masked by independently generated pairs that
are not correlated to one another. The maximum fidelity in the source-detector setup of Figure 3
(average 𝐹sd ≈ 0.95) is observed at low pump powers where multipair probability is negligible, but
the rate is also reduced. Hence, the pump power serves as a control parameter to appropriately
balance rate and source fidelity.

3.2 Polarization Drift Prediction Model
Polarization drift is a complex physical process that we do not attempt to model precisely in this
paper, although related models have been constructed [4]. In principle, one could model polarization

1.00.50.00.51.0Stokes Parameter Value09-29 1809-30 0009-30 0609-30 1209-30 1810-01 0010-01 0610-01 12Time (Date / Hour)0.000.020.040.06Mean Polarization Drift Rate (rad/s)Rate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

9

Algorithm 1 Simulation of Polarization Compensation
Input: the initial fidelity 𝐹0,pol, the target fidelity 𝐹target, the start time 𝑡0
Output: total compensation time, final fidelity
1: 𝜃, 𝜃target ← angles_from_fids(𝐹0,pol, 𝐹target)
2: 𝑡 ← 𝑡0
3: while 𝜃 > 𝜃target do
𝜃 = 𝜃 −
4:
𝑡 ← 𝑡 + Δ
5:
6: end while
7: return 𝑡 − 𝑡0, fid_from_angle(𝜃 )

2 sin 𝜃 + Δ · 𝑑 (𝑡)

𝜂

⊲ Convert fidelities to drift angles via Eq. 1

⊲ Simulate a noisy gradient descent step

drift by monitoring the relevant environmental factors (wind, incident sunlight, vibrations from
vehicles, etc.); however, in practice, it is impractical over a link with 10s of kilometers of aerial fiber.
Since we are only interested in the aggregate change in polarization over time, a simpler empirical
method suffices for our purposes.

To develop our model, we instead turn to a more readily accessible variable: measured drift rates.
We find that polarization drift over a short period of time is strongly correlated with drift over
a subsequent short period of time. We build our model empirically from a dedicated experiment
which tracked the state of polarization over a period of 48 hours3. This data is shown in Figure 5.
The training of our model is simple: for a pair of durations (Δ𝑡1, Δ𝑡2), we sample a time 𝑡 and
find the corresponding three stokes vectors 𝑣𝑡 −Δ𝑡1
, 𝑣𝑡, 𝑣𝑡 +Δ𝑡2. Then we compute the two consecutive
, 𝑣𝑡 ) and 𝜃2 = angle_between(𝑣𝑡, 𝑣𝑡 +Δ𝑡2 ). Repeating this
drift angles as 𝜃1 = angle_between(𝑣𝑡 −Δ𝑡1
for 𝑁 = 106 randomly chosen values of 𝑡 results in a distribution of drift angles 𝜃2 given parameters
(Δ𝑡1, Δ𝑡2, 𝜃1). We repeat this for 64 representative values of (Δ𝑡1, Δ𝑡2) to create a general and
practical model.

3.3 Modeling the Polarization Compensator
Simulating the effects of the APC requires a model to predict its run time and resulting fidelity
upon termination, given the current link state. These aspects of the device have not been studied,
so we developed a model based on conversations with the device manufacturer and 70 hours of
experimental data from an APC test over a similar link (62km aerial fiber).

The details of the APC’s compensation algorithm are proprietary, so we make several assumptions
in the construction of our model. We know that the routine is gradient-descent-based, repeatedly
measuring the polarization state and applying corrections until the fidelity target is met or the
routine times out. We assume vanilla Riemannian gradient descent, which is designed for optimiza-
tion on smooth manifolds such the surface of the 3-dimensional unit sphere of Stokes vectors. The
update step of this algorithm is

𝜃𝑘+1 = 𝜃𝑘 −

sin 𝜃𝑘

(2)

𝜂

2

where 𝜃𝑘 is the angle between the ideal and realized vectors at iteration 𝑘 of gradient descent and
𝜂 is the step size.

Second, we assume that the effect of polarization drift on compensation can be modeled by a
noise term within each gradient descent step. We assume this term is equal to the product of the
current drift rate 𝑑 (𝑡) and the duration of each step Δ = 27.7ms.

3Given a sufficiently long operation time, such a model could be built without a dedicated experiment by gathering drift
statistics during operation.

10

Connor Clayton et al.

The modeled compensation routine is shown in Algorithm 1; more details on the fit to experi-
mental data can be found in Appendix C. We note that the results in this paper assume this model,
and deviations from this model may affect the results upon deployment.

4 OPTIMIZING ENTANGLEMENT DISTRIBUTION
Given an understanding of the available hardware and modeling techniques, described in the previ-
ous section for one deployed link, we now introduce a more general framework that decomposes
entanglement generation into a sequence of optimization problems. In this section, we focus on
optimizing the performance of a single link. We extend the framework to consider entanglement
across multiple links in Section 7.3.

4.1 Opt-0: Optimizing Controllable Parameters
We first consider a stable experimental setting in which link drift is negligible or ignored, such as a
short, closed laboratory link or a brief experiment with pre- and post-calibration checks. Even in
this regime, source- and receiver-side parameters must be tuned to maximize entanglement rates
under a minimum (and possibly time-varying) fidelity constraint. We define Opt-0 as the problem of
selecting controllable parameters (e.g., pump power at the source, integration time at the receiver)
to maximize entanglement rate subject to a target fidelity.

An Opt-0-type optimization has been integrated into a quantum link layer protocol [12, 36],
where a parameterized microwave pulse at the source is used to control the rate-fidelity tradeoff.
The class of problems posed by Opt-0 is more general, as it encompasses multiple controllable
parameters at both the source and receiver and potentially more complex tradeoffs. Nevertheless,
these remain the primary studies to consider link-level control in this context.

4.2 Opt-1: Managing Uncontrollable Parameters
For wide-area entanglement distribution, links are inevitably subject to time-varying and unpre-
dictable noise, particularly for above-ground deployments exposed to environmental factors such
as temperature, wind, and human activity. Some effects exhibit predictable patterns (e.g., diurnal
temperature cycles), while others do not, complicating long-duration experiments.

We define Opt-1 as the problem of optimizing the mitigation of these uncontrollable, performance-
degrading link parameters. Prior work has addressed physical-layer aspects of Opt-1 over long-
distance links, including clock synchronization [33] through the IEEE-1588 Standard (PTP [41] and
related White Rabbit [31] protocols) and polarization stabilization using commercial compensation
devices [10, 43]. However, prior to this work, these techniques have not been systematically
optimized, particularly with respect to their impact on end-to-end system performance.

Solutions to Opt-1 must maintain acceptable operating conditions while balancing downtime,
compensation accuracy, and interference with the quantum signal. Compensation often requires
pausing quantum data transmission, making its frequency and duration critical design parameters.
Thus, Opt-1 involves trading off improved link quality against compensation overhead to maximize
overall link utility.

4.3 Opt-2: Joint Optimization
Finally, consider again a general wide-area quantum link. Practical entanglement distribution
can only be achieved if the link is able to consistently produce high-fidelity entanglement at a
sufficient rate. Achieving this requires tuning of controllable parameters according to application-
specified fidelity requirements and the current state of the link. Further, invocation of any link
compensation algorithm must take into account the overhead of drift correction in conjunction
with the current link state. This is problem Opt-2: joint optimization of controllable parameters

Rate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

11

Variable Definition
𝐹
𝑟
𝐹min
𝐹sd
𝐹pol
𝐹 𝛿
pol
𝐹trigger
𝐹target
𝑇timeout
𝑇eff
¯𝑟

end-to-end fidelity
end-to-end entanglement distribution rate
minimum fidelity requirement
source-detector fidelity
polarization fidelity
𝛿-conservative prediction of 𝐹pol
APC triggering fidelity threshold
APC target fidelity threshold
APC timeout duration
expected time until the next fidelity check
average rate within a period
Table 1. Summary of variables used in this paper.

while compensating for the uncontrollable. A salient feature of Opt-2 solutions is the feedback loop
between compensation overhead and controllable parameter settings, as both must be considered
in concert to achieve high entanglement rates.

The focus of this paper is a protocol for Opt-2. Part of our work concerned with source control is
similar to [12], though the hardware involved, as we have described, is markedly different. The
primary focus of our protocol is to explore the feedback loop intrinsic in solutions for Opt-2:
scheduling compensations based on link performance, which depends on the parameter settings
and compensation quality. We describe this protocol next.

5 DYNAMIC CONTROL PROTOCOL
The experimental setup described above defines a control problem. Our link protocol therefore has
access to five control variables:

• Source-detector parameter: (1) pump laser power
• Drift parameters: (2) timing of fidelity checks, (3) APC triggering fidelity threshold, (4) APC

target fidelity threshold, (5) APC timeout duration

At time 𝑡, the link distributes entanglement at a rate of 𝑟 (𝑡) entangled pairs per second with
approximate4 fidelity 𝐹 (𝑡) ≈ 𝐹sd(𝑡)𝐹pol(𝑡). The objective of a protocol here is to maximize the
expected long-run average entanglement distribution rate subject to a hard minimum fidelity
constraint 𝐹min. Entangled pairs are discarded when the fidelity requirement is not met; i.e., 𝑟 (𝑡) = 0
whenever 𝐹 (𝑡) < 𝐹min. The choice of this strict fidelity requirement is to ensure robust entanglement
generation at the link level, as applications of quantum networks require entanglement of sufficient
fidelity [12] and protocols involving multiple links typically assume a constant fidelity for each
link.

Static Protocols. Existing entanglement distribution protocols of this type make straightforward
use of available resources and APIs by setting constant values for the five control variables. A
recent experiment demonstrating state-of-the-art entanglement distribution across a metropolitan
scale link uses constant values for all five control variables [43].

4The true end-to-end fidelity would be estimated experimentally by a prolonged measurement of many copies of the
transmitted quantum states, destroying the entanglement [3, 49]. In contrast, this 𝐹 (𝑡 ) model is efficiently computable for
our real-time protocol, and should well approximate and scale monotonically with the true fidelity.

12

Connor Clayton et al.

5.1 Intuition
It is useful to think of the system as two independent components:

(1) The source and detector form a single logical unit responsible for the creation and mea-
surement of Bell states. The rate 𝑟 (𝑡) and fidelity 𝐹sd of entangled pair generation are fully
and continuously controllable by the pump laser power (see Section 3.1, Figure 4a).

(2) The transmission medium responsible for distributing entangled photons between the source
and detector is not directly controllable and only adds noise (and loss) to the entanglement
generated through subsystem (1). Much of the effect of transmission is determined by the
environment, can only be measured through active probing, and can only be controlled
through active compensation (see Figure 5).

From this decomposition, it becomes clear that the role of the pump power should be to counteract
the effect of polarization drift. Since 𝐹pol tends to decrease over time, we want to lower the pump
power over time in order to raise 𝐹sd and therefore sustain 𝐹 (𝑡) = 𝐹sd(𝑡)𝐹pol(𝑡) ≥ 𝐹min. This
approach will decrease our end-to-end rate over time, as a consequence of the decreasing pump
laser power.

Ideally, we would like keep our pump power as high as possible to maximize the end-to-end
rate. However, this is likely sub-optimal as the polarization drift is unknown. Instead, we use
our polarization drift prediction model to estimate the extent of polarization drift, and select
pump power conservatively to ensure that we maintain 𝐹 (𝑡) ≥ 𝐹min with high probability. Our
methodology for meeting this criterion is explained in Section 5.2.

This conservative power adjustment, while necessary to avoid high-penalty 𝐹min violations, tends
to reduce our rate more than is strictly necessary. In addition, the uncertainty in our polarization
estimate increases with time. In order to correct possible sub-optimality, it is desirable to invoke
a fidelity check to learn the current value of 𝐹pol(𝑡). Doing so allows us to reset the pump power
to the optimal value and gives us updated information on the current polarization drift levels.
However, we do not want to invoke this capability too often, as we want to balance the information
gain of a fidelity check with the downtime it incurs. The full policy is explained in Section 5.3.

After some amount of time, we should perform polarization compensation in order to mitigate
the effects of polarization drift, which forces our rate to generally decrease over time. To do so, we
set the APC triggering fidelity such that we trigger a compensation when the fidelity has drifted low
enough that the increase in rate from compensating outweighs the opportunity cost of downtime
during compensation. We also set the value of the target fidelity threshold and timeout duration to
balance the increase in 𝐹pol with downtime. The details of our policy for setting the APC device
parameters are given in Sections 5.4 and 5.5.

5.2 Pump Power Control Policy
Given perfect information of 𝐹pol (𝑡), the optimal pump power control policy is to choose the pump
power such that 𝐹 (𝑡) = 𝐹min, i.e.,

𝐹sd = 𝐹min/𝐹pol.

(3)

This choice is guaranteed to maximize rate subject to the minimum fidelity constraint.

During execution, however, the exact value of 𝐹pol is only known immediately after a fidelity
check. Given this uncertainty, our polarization drift model allows us to maintain a belief distribution
over 𝐹pol(𝑡). Using this, we control the pump power conservatively such that

Pr[𝐹 (𝑡) < 𝐹min] ≤ 𝛿

(4)

Rate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

13

for a fixed confidence parameter 𝛿 ∈ (0, 1). Equivalently, power is chosen as if the transmission
fidelity were equal to the 𝛿-quantile of the belief distribution. In our simulations, we select 𝛿 = 0.10,
meaning that we assume a polarization drift rate in the 90th percentile according to our model.

5.3 Fidelity Check Initiation Policy
A fidelity check returns the exact current value of 𝐹pol after a fixed downtime duration 𝑡check, during
which the rate 𝑟 (𝑡) = 0. Fidelity checks may be initiated at any time.

The protocol schedules fidelity checks adaptively, based on a value-of-information criterion. Let
𝑟 (𝐹 𝛿
) denote the rate achieved using our current predicted 𝛿-conservative polarization fidelity. Let
pol
𝑇eff denote the expected time until the next check, and let Λ1 and Λ2 be the expected throughput
over the next 𝑇eff seconds if we do and do not perform a check, respectively. A fidelity check is
initiated when

Λ1 − Λ2 ≥ 𝑟 (𝐹 𝛿

pol)𝑡check.

(5)

This condition compares the expected rate gain from resolving uncertainty to the opportunity cost
of downtime. Fidelity checks are therefore performed only when uncertainty induces a sufficiently
large rate penalty. Λ1, Λ2 may be calculated through estimates of future rates using the polarization
drift predictor — see Appendix D for details on efficient computation of Λ𝑖 .

5.4 Fixing Compensation Duration
Our choice of polarization compensation target fidelity 𝐹target and timeout duration 𝑇timeout is based
on a simple observation: that setting

𝐹target = 1.0 ; 𝑇timeout = 𝑐

(6)

for some constant 𝑐 ensures that the compensation routine will take time 𝑐. To see this, note that the
APC’s gradient descent approach combined with continuous drift effectively ensures 𝐹pol(𝑡) < 1.0
at all times 𝑡. In our simulations, we choose 𝑐 := 1 second.

This choice is unconventional but carries several benefits. First, assuming a constant compen-
sation duration greatly simplifies the analysis of optimal compensation initiation, allowing for a
much cleaner triggering policy (see Section 5.5). It also removes the need for potentially complex
control policies governing 𝐹target and 𝑇timeout.

Second, limiting compensation time makes efficient use of the diminishing returns seen during the
compensation routine. From Section 3.3, we expect that the increase in fidelity decays exponentially
with each gradient descent iteration, while the loss of throughput during compensation is linear in
time. As a result, the net benefit of additional compensation time is strictly decreasing; fixing the
compensation time truncates this low-value tail in a principled manner.

Finally, this policy is robust against unknown, time-varying polarization drift. From Section 3.3,
we find that a high drift rate can prevent the compensator from reaching the target fidelity; this
phenomenon commonly results in expensive compensation routines trying to reach an unachievable
𝐹target (see [43]). In contrast, a fixed-duration policy avoids implicit assumptions about the achievable
polarization fidelity and guarantees bounded downtime regardless of drift conditions.

5.5 Polarization Compensation Initiation
Polarization compensation routines naturally define “periods” of protocol execution, which we
define to be the time between the end of one compensation routine and the end of the next. As an
approximation to our objective of maximizing the long-run average entanglement distribution rate,
we aim to maximize the average rate of each individual period.

14

Connor Clayton et al.

Fig. 6. Example execution of the adaptive protocol across one period, showing all major characteristics. From
top to bottom: end-to-end rate, pump power and source-detector fidelity, actual and predicted polarization
fidelity, and end-to-end fidelity. See Section 5.6 for a detailed explanation.

For a given time 𝑡, let ¯𝑟 (𝑡) be the average rate of the current period if we were to initiate
compensation at time 𝑡. Then we can show that the average rate of the period is maximized
when the instantaneous rate equals the period’s average rate, and therefore we should initiate a
compensation whenever

𝑟 (𝑡) ≤ ¯𝑟 (𝑡).

(7)

See Appendix E for a derivation of this policy.

Since the rate is determined by our chosen pump power and the compensation duration is set to
a constant, we can easily track the quantities 𝑟 (𝑡) and ¯𝑟 (𝑡). We initiate a fidelity check whenever
the condition in Equation 7 is met to ensure that we do not operate in this suboptimal regime5.

Upon initiation, it is possible that 𝑟 (𝑡) is simply suboptimal due to our conservative choice of
pump power. Therefore, we set 𝐹trigger to be the value of 𝐹pol that, if measured, would result in a
rate that violates the condition in Equation 7. This is computed directly from our pump power
policy.

5.6 Putting It All Together
We explain how the components of our link control protocol work together through a representative
run over a 29-second period between two polarization compensations, shown in Figure 6. The
following descriptions correspond to the circled numbers in Figure 6:
(0) The solid green curve in the topmost subplot shows the end-to-end entanglement distribution
rate 𝑟 (𝑡) at each time 𝑡. Notice that 𝑟 (𝑡) decreases in the time between each fidelity check (thin
vertical lines), and that 𝑟 (𝑡) trends downward throughout the period overall.

(1) The second subplot shows pump power and 𝐹sd over time. Pump power is chosen to satisfy the
condition in Equation 4. Notice that the trends in 𝐹sd mirror that of the pump power, while

5Note that this is a second criterion to initiate a fidelity check, supplemental to the condition given in Section 5.3

Time(hh:mm:ss)0.860.870.88Source-DetectorFidelity175200225Pump Power (mW)FsdPump Power10.981.00Polarization FidelityFpolF=0.1pol208:04:1008:04:1508:04:200.850.860.87End-to-End FidelityF(t)Fmin3607080EntanglementDistribution Rater(t)r(t)04657Fidelity CheckPolarization CompensationRate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

15

trends in 𝑟 (𝑡) mimic the pump power. This stems directly from the experimental relationships
between these quantities shown in Figure 4a.

(2) The third subplot shows the trends in actual and predicted polarization fidelity. After each
changes based on the observed drift since the previous check.
< 𝐹pol throughout this example; in general, we expect this to be true at least 90% of the

fidelity check, our estimate 𝐹 𝛿=0.1
𝐹 𝛿=0.1
pol
time based on our choice of 𝛿 = 0.10.

pol

(3) The bottom-most subplot shows the end-to-end fidelity as a result of the parameters from the
plots above. At all times, the algorithm attempts to maintain an end-to-end fidelity above the
minimum requirement 𝐹min.

(4) Most fidelity checks occur due to the condition in Equation 5. In this instance, the protocol
determines that the expected rate gain from performing a fidelity check outweighs the associated
loss.

(5) To ensure ¯𝑟 is monotonically increasing, the protocol initiates a fidelity check whenever the
instantaneous rate drops below the running average for the period (Equation 7). In this particular
instance, the polarization prediction 𝐹 𝛿
pol was overly pessimistic, so 𝑟 (𝑡) was unnecessarily low
and a full compensation was not triggered.

(6) Once again 𝑟 (𝑡) dips below ¯𝑟 (𝑡), but this time the rate cannot be recovered above 𝑟 (𝑡) and a
polarization compensation is initiated. Notice that this event coincides with a substantial drop
in 𝐹pol.

(7) Each polarization compensation routine lasts a fixed duration of 1 second, as described in

Section 5.4.

6 RESULTS
Here we present evaluations of our link control protocol, starting with a discussion of how the
results were derived. Next, we compare our protocol to currently adopted practices, and present
results under varying fidelity requirements as determined by higher level applications. Finally, we
benchmark against a theoretical upper bound which assumes no polarization drift.

6.1 Methodology
All results are derived from a custom trace-driven simulator. Source code for this simulator and the
underlying trace data are publicly available [8].

The underlying trace data were derived over the 64 km partially-aerial LTS-NIST fiber link and
span three days. Each data point contains the Stokes parameters measured every 100 milliseconds,
enabling fine-grained reconstruction of polarization drift. In our simulations, we use the drift data
to compute the polarization fidelity 𝐹pol over time, which is then used to evaluate the decisions
made by the control algorithms.

Now consider a “static” protocol that issues an APC probe with some fixed input parameters
(𝐹trigger, 𝐹target,𝑇timeout) every 5 seconds and maintains constant pump power. After each probe,
𝐹pol ≥ 𝐹trigger by construction; polarization fidelity then degrades over the next five seconds until
the next probe. The end-to-end fidelity is given by the product of the fixed source–receiver fidelity
𝐹sd and 𝐹pol(𝑡), and the entanglement rate is derived directly from the pump power. While evaluating
static protocols, we optimize over fidelity check frequency and 𝐹sd (a linear function of pump power,
see Figure 4a). The values of the APC parameters are fixed at 𝐹trigger = 0.98, 𝐹target = 0.99,𝑇timeout =
55𝑠, consistent with a recent demonstration using the same device [43].

We apply the same method to evaluate our adaptive protocol, accounting for dynamically adjusted
parameters. Pump power is updated every 100ms. attenuator that sets the pump power to the
desired value. APC probes are scheduled as needed based on the protocol state (Sections 5.3-5.5).

16

Connor Clayton et al.

(a) Overall (24hr period)

(b) Nighttime (10pm-6am)

(c) Daytime (10am-6pm)

Fig. 7. Results comparing our adaptive link control protocol with static protocols (with different pump
powers/𝐹sd and fidelity check frequencies) under static application demands (𝐹min = 0.85).

6.2 Static Application Demands
Figure 7 compares our adaptive protocol to different static protocols over different time intervals:
24 hours (Figure 7a), 8 hours of night time (Figure 7b), and 8 hours of day time (Figure 7c). Here,
we set the application fidelity demand (𝐹min) as a constant (0.85). For the static protocols, we vary
both 𝐹sd and fidelity check intervals.

The result shows that the adaptive protocol performs well across all time intervals, whereas
static protocol parameters require careful selection for reasonable performance. Over a 24 hour
period, the adaptive protocol outperforms the best static protocol by 14%, and this increases to 16%
at night. The gap is smaller during the day (6%), but it is important to understand that the “best”
static protocol for one day could be very different for another.

Static protocol performance shows an expected trend: if the source-detector fidelity 𝐹sd is set too
close to 𝐹min, then these protocols are not able to provide high entanglement throughput. Conversely,
setting a more conservative 𝐹sd does not allow the static protocols to maximize entanglement rate.
Even with a well-chosen 𝐹sd, the best fidelity check interval varies over time (e.g., ~1s during the
day versus ~10s at night). Further, these parameter values are sensitive to application demands
(𝐹min) and the polarization drift rate, both of which may vary unpredictably. No parameter choices
are required for the adaptive algorithm.

6.3 Varying Application Demands
The previous result fixed the application requirement of fidelity (𝐹min) to 0.85. However, we expect
a real-world deployment of quantum networks will have to support multiple applications, each of
which may have different requirements. One of the major advantages of our adaptive protocol is
that it can adapt to changing 𝐹min “on-the-fly”.

Figure 8 shows entanglement distribution rates achieved (𝑦-axis) by the adaptive protocol and
different static protocols with changing 𝐹min (𝑥-axis). The results (obtained over a 24-hour run) again
show that the adaptive protocol is able to outperform each static protocol, but more importantly,
each static protocol optimizes for a single 𝐹min.

The result also shows the limits of the adaptive protocol, as entanglement rate steadily dips (and
reaches 0 for 𝐹min ≈ 0.9475). This is expected, as the higher values of 𝐹min cannot be sustained by

Static protocol with constant ﬁdelity check freqency:0.5s1s2s3s5s10s20sAdaptive protocolMean entanglement distribution rate               (entangled pairs/s)               0.850.860.870.880.89Fsd0204060800.850.860.870.880.89Fsd0.850.860.870.880.89FsdRate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

17

Fig. 8. Comparison of adaptive protocol against static protocols with changing fidelity targets 𝐹min.

the adaptive (or indeed, any protocol), as even the most conservative source setting (25mW pump
power) provides 𝐹sd ≈ 0.9475 (see Figure 4a).

The previous result shows that the adaptive protocol is able to adapt to different 𝐹min requirements
(over 24 hours). However, the protocol can also adapt to instantaneously changing 𝐹min, as 𝐹min is
simply used as an input to Equation 3. We show the results from an artificial scenario where the
required 𝐹min changes continuously in the shape of a sine curve. While we do not expect application
demands to necessarily change with every entanglement requested, this experiment provides an
“extreme” scenario to understand and visualize the dynamics of the adaptive protocol. It’s important
to note that the adaptive protocol is not only adapting to the changing 𝐹min, but also to the unknown
link drift simultaneously. Finally, it is perhaps not a stretch to emphasize that no static protocol
would perform well in such a scenario.

Figure 9 shows the performance of the adaptive protocol with continuously changing 𝐹min (red
curve in Figure 9a). The figure shows that the adaptive protocol is able to maintain requisite fidelity
(blue line in Figure 9a) with changing 𝐹min. Figures 9b and 9c shows the entanglement rate achieved
and pump powers set by the protocol over time. As expected, the achievable entanglement rate
mirrors 𝐹min, as does the pump power set. It is interesting to note that the protocol is compensating
for two changing variables at each step here: polarization drift over the link, and 𝐹min. We also
see that the protocol invokes the APC probes more frequently as we approach the maximum
feasible 𝐹min, and less frequently as 𝐹min recedes. This behavior can be explained as follows: as 𝐹min
approaches the maximum attainable 𝐹min with this experimental setup, the protocol is frequently
forced to set pump power to the minimum available, triggering an APC probe. On the other hand,
as the required 𝐹min decreases, the instantaneous rate and average rate curves tend to not converge
(See Equation 7 in Section 5.5), allowing for longer runs without re-calibration.

6.4 Evaluation Against Theoretical Upper Bound
The adaptive protocol presented here provides no guarantees of optimality, and indeed the process
of defining an optimal protocol is unclear. Even if we consider an “optimal” that has perfect future
knowledge of drift, it is unclear how often to initiate APC probing, and with what parameters. If
we further assume polarization compensations take zero time, then the best policy would be to
continuously compensate.

0.840.860.880.900.920.94Minimum Fidelity Requirement (Fmin)020406080Mean Entanglement Distribution Rate               (entangled pairs/s)AdaptiveStatic:Fsd0.850.870.890.910.9318

Connor Clayton et al.

Fig. 9. Protocol adaptivity under continuously-changing link demands following a sine curve (dashed red
line): (top) end-to-end fidelity, (middle) entanglement distribution rate, (bottom) pump power and 𝐹sd. Vertical
black lines indicate polarization compensations.

In this “optimal” scenario, the system is equivalent to a link with no drift, and pump power should
be chosen such that 𝐹sd = 𝐹min. The throughput in the zero-drift scenario therefore constitutes an
(unachievable) upper bound on the performance of any protocol. We compare the performance of
the adaptive protocol to this theoretical upper bound.

For the experiments in Figure 7, this bound is a rate of 85.6 entanglements/second. Over a 24-hour
period, the adaptive protocol performs within 21% of the upper-bound (with ~9% of that time being
devoted to probes and compensation). The comparison at night is more interesting, as drift rate is
lower and more closely resembles the upper bound scenario. At night, the gap is < 8%, of which
3.4% is due to probes and compensation. These results indicate that the scope for improvement for
more sophisticated prediction and compensation is relatively modest (<5%). Moreover, the adaptive
protocol is relatively simple and lightweight, and can easily be integrated into existing deployments
without major investment in computing hardware.

7 DISCUSSION

7.1 Deployment Considerations
A practical advantage of the proposed protocol is that it requires only software access to control
interfaces already common in deployed wide-area quantum links. In the system studied here, the
controller adjusts the source pump power via an electronically-tunable attenuator and adjusts the
APC probe parameters through an API provided by the manufacturer. Thus, deployment requires
no additional quantum hardware. It requires only a classical control process with access to existing
control knobs

The online control logic is lightweight. Runtime decisions consist of table lookups and 𝑂 (1) time
parameter calculations. The APC simulation used in our evaluation (Algorithm 1) is not part of
deployment, since compensation is executed directly by the APC device. Similarly, the controller
requires only low-bandwidth communication for distributing parameters and fidelity check results.
The relevant timescale in our simulations is 100ms; we expect that the lightweight computation,
control, and communication requirements will fit well within this window.

0.850.90End-to-End FidelityF(t)Fmin050100EntanglementDistribution Rater(t)30 09:0030 09:0530 09:1030 09:15Time (day hh:mm)0.850.900.95Source-DetectorFidelityFsdPump Power100200Pump Power (mW)Rate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

19

The main deployment cost is characterization. The entanglement source must have a well-
characterized rate-fidelity curve and there must be sufficient polarization drift statistics to initialize
the prediction model. These measurements are standard characterization procedures that can be
performed during commissioning and refined during normal operation. This makes the protocol
suitable for near-term deployment as a software control layer over existing wide-area quantum
link infrastructure.

7.2 Extension to General Quantum Links
While the control protocol presented here was developed around specific quantum hardware, we
believe that the fundamental concepts apply broadly. The problem classes Opt-0 (optimization of
controllable parameters) and Opt-1 (compensation of uncontrollable parameters) are universal to
all quantum links and therefore Opt-2 (the joint optimization of Opt-0 and Opt-1 over the same
link) represents a general and practical class of problems for which the methods presented here
provide a blueprint.

Opt-0 formalizes the idea of managing tunable hardware parameters to improve end-to-end
system performance, rather than simply maximizing the performance of individual components.
Quantum hardware often exposes many parameters that can be tuned. Many intrinsic hardware
tradeoffs beyond pump power can be exploited for optimization; we discussed several examples in
Sections 2.1 and 2.2. As a further example, consider the following binary tradeoff: two successful
measurement outcomes occur with equal probability, but only one corresponds to higher-fidelity
entanglement [24]. This forces a choice between discarding low-fidelity events to maximize fidelity
or retaining all events to maximize rate.

Opt-1 concerns compensation of uncontrollable noise parameters, which is again universal.
Polarization stabilization is required for all photonic quantum links regardless of encoding, and
notably is relevant for optical entanglement swapping, where increasing polarization mismatch
reduces success probability. The magnitude and timescale of polarization drift depend on link
characteristics (e.g., length, aerial versus buried fiber), but every compensation strategy induces
tradeoffs. Coexistence schemes that multiplex reference light with quantum signals avoid system
downtime but yield imperfect compensation due to wavelength-dependent drift. Conversely, us-
ing same-wavelength reference signals enables high-precision compensation but necessaitates
downtime as the reference signals overwhelm the quantum signals.

Taken together, these considerations make Opt-2 a general problem that applies to all wide-area
quantum settings. While the specific control and response variables will vary by link, a common
general structure emerges: controllable parameters induce tunable tradeoffs between entanglement
rate and fidelity, while uncontrollable drift introduces noise that must be mitigated at the cost of
rate and/or fidelity. The core control-theoretic principle is to adjust controllable parameters to
offset the effects of drift while compensating for uncontrollable parameters in a way that balances
the cost and benefit of compensation. We expect these concepts to extend naturally to a wide range
of quantum links beyond the specific system studied here.

7.3 Extension to Higher Layers of the Quantum Networking Stack
A natural extension of the above framework is the joint optimization of two or more links working
in tandem to distribute entanglement over multiple hops. Each link has its own sets of controllable
parameters (Opt-0) and time-varying noise parameters (Opt-1); we refer to the resulting multi-link
problem as Opt-3. Unlike earlier cases, Opt-3 must account for network topology while jointly
configuring parameters and compensation strategies on a per-link basis.

20

Connor Clayton et al.

Even for two links, Opt-3 is a broad and largely open problem when realistic hardware constraints
are considered. Although out of scope for this paper, we illustrate the key considerations with a two-
hop example. Consider three nodes 𝐴, 𝐵, and 𝐶, connected by links 𝐴-𝐵 (Link 0) and 𝐵-𝐶 (Link 1),
with entanglement swapping at 𝐵 [35]. Suppose Link 0 is stable (e.g., short underground fiber),
while Link 1 exhibits significant drift. An application specifies a minimum end-to-end entanglement
quality requirement, which constrains the allowable operating points of each link.

Under an Opt-2 protocol, each link exposes a set of achievable rate–fidelity operating points.
Because Link 1 is more unstable, its feasible region is more restricted. An Opt-3 controller must
then choose how Link 0 operates relative to Link 1: matching its rate, increasing fidelity to improve
the end-to-end fidelity, increasing its rate to enable entanglement distillation [27], or adopting
another strategy. The optimal choice depends on hardware capabilities and how entanglement is
ultimately consumed by higher layers.

This scenario demonstrates that Opt-2 (and our protocol) provides a useful abstraction for link
behavior. By exposing a feasible set of rate–fidelity operating points, Opt-2 grants higher-layer
Opt-3 protocols flexibility in optimizing end-to-end performance.

8 CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we presented a control protocol for quantum links that explicitly accounts for
physical-layer impediments while exploiting controllable rate-fidelity tradeoffs in modern quantum
networking hardware. Improvements in the performance of present-day quantum networks are
typically driven by advances in hardware, yet our results demonstrate that carefully designed
software control can yield substantial gains without increasing hardware requirements. Importantly,
the proposed protocol has a clear path to deployment within existing experimental infrastructures.
More broadly, the optimization framework introduced here extends beyond the specific link studied
and highlights the potential for software-based control to play a significant role in improving the
performance of near-term quantum networks.

9 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Mael Flament, Gabriel Bello Portmann, Rourke Sekelsky, and Aditya Varma of the Qunnect
team for helpful discussions about the mechanics of the APC and for characterization data of the
Qu-SRC. We also thank Ivan Burenkov, Alan Migdall, and Thomas Gerrits for helpful conversations
and comments during the preparation of the manuscript. This work was supported by a National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (Grant No. DGE 2236417).

REFERENCES
[1] H Aghaee Rad, T Ainsworth, RN Alexander, B Altieri, MF Askarani, R Baby, L Banchi, BQ Baragiola, JE Bourassa, RS

Chadwick, et al. 2025. Scaling and networking a modular photonic quantum computer. Nature (2025), 1–8.

[2] J. B. Altepeter, E. R. Jeffrey, and P. G. Kwiat. 2005. Photonic State Tomography. Advances In Atomic, Molecular, and

Optical Physics, Vol. 52. Academic Press, 105–159. doi:10.1016/S1049-250X(05)52003-2

[3] Joseph B Altepeter, Evan R Jeffrey, and Paul G Kwiat. 2005. Photonic state tomography. Advances in atomic, molecular,

and optical physics 52 (2005), 105–159.

[4] Patrick R. Banner, Steven L. Rolston, and Joseph W. Britton. 2025. BIFROST: A First-Principles Model of Polarization

Mode Dispersion in Optical Fiber. arXiv:2510.01212 [physics.optics] https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.01212

[5] Charles H Bennett and Gilles Brassard. 1984. Quantum cryptography: Public key distribution and coin tossing. In

Proceedings of the international conference on computers, systems and signal processing. 175–179.

[6] Eric Bersin, Matthew Grein, Madison Sutula, Ryan Murphy, Yan Qi Huan, Mark Stevens, Aziza Suleymanzade, Catherine
Lee, Ralf Riedinger, David J. Starling, Pieter-Jan Stas, Can M. Knaut, Neil Sinclair, Daniel R. Assumpcao, Yan-Cheng
Wei, Erik N. Knall, Bartholomeus Machielse, Denis D. Sukachev, David S. Levonian, Mihir K. Bhaskar, Marko Lončar,
Scott Hamilton, Mikhail Lukin, Dirk Englund, and P. Benjamin Dixon. 2024. Development of a Boston-area 50-km
fiber quantum network testbed. Phys. Rev. Appl. 21 (Jan 2024), 014024. Issue 1. doi:10.1103/PhysRevApplied.21.014024

Rate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

21

[7] Joshua Bienfang, Thomas Gerrits, Paulina Kuo, Alan Migdall, Sergey Polyakov, and Oliver Slattery. 2025.
https://www.nist.gov/publications/

Single-photon Sources and Detectors Dictionary.
single-photon-sources-and-detectors-dictionary-0 Last Modified: 2025-08-04T15:08-04:00.

NIST (Aug. 2025).

[8] Connor Clayton and Quinn Carmack. 2026. Source Code for “Rate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links”.

https://github.com/cbclayton/dynamic-quantum-link-control

[9] Connor Clayton, Xiaodi Wu, and Bobby Bhattacharjee. 2024. Efficient Routing on Quantum Networks using Adaptive

Clustering. In 2024 IEEE 32nd International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP). IEEE, 1–12.

[10] Alexander N Craddock, Anne Lazenby, Gabriel Bello Portmann, Rourke Sekelsky, Mael Flament, and Mehdi Namazi.
2024. Automated distribution of polarization-entangled photons using deployed New York City fibers. PRX Quantum
5, 3 (2024), 030330.

[11] Alexander N Craddock, Yang Wang, Felipe Giraldo, Rourke Sekelsky, Mael Flament, and Mehdi Namazi. 2024. High-rate
subgigahertz-linewidth bichromatic entanglement source for quantum networking. Physical Review Applied 21, 3
(2024), 034012.

[12] Axel Dahlberg, Matthew Skrzypczyk, Tim Coopmans, Leon Wubben, Filip Rozpędek, Matteo Pompili, Arian Stolk,
Przemysław Pawełczak, Robert Knegjens, Julio de Oliveira Filho, et al. 2019. A link layer protocol for quantum
networks. In Proceedings of the ACM special interest group on data communication. 159–173.

[13] C Delle Donne, M Iuliano, B Van Der Vecht, GM Ferreira, H Jirovská, TJW Van Der Steenhoven, A Dahlberg, M
Skrzypczyk, D Fioretto, M Teller, et al. 2025. An operating system for executing applications on quantum network
nodes. Nature 639, 8054 (2025), 321–328.

[14] L.-M. Duan, M. D. Lukin, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller. 2001. Long-distance quantum communication with atomic ensembles

and linear optics. Nature 414, 6862 (Nov. 2001), 413–418. doi:10.1038/35106500

[15] M. D. Eisaman, J. Fan, A. Migdall, and S. V. Polyakov. 2011. Invited Review Article: Single-photon sources and detectors.

Review of Scientific Instruments 82, 7 (2011), 071101. doi:10.1063/1.3610677

[16] Artur K Ekert. 1991. Quantum cryptography based on Bell’s theorem. Physical review letters 67, 6 (1991), 661.
[17] Vittorio Giovannetti, Seth Lloyd, and Lorenzo Maccone. 2004. Quantum-enhanced measurements: beating the standard

quantum limit. Science 306, 5700 (2004), 1330–1336.

[18] N. Gisin and B. Huttner. 1997. Combined effects of polarization mode dispersion and polarization dependent losses in

optical fibers. Optics Communications 142, 1 (1997), 119–125. doi:10.1016/S0030-4018(97)00236-8

[19] Daniel Gottesman, Thomas Jennewein, and Sarah Croke. 2012. Longer-Baseline Telescopes Using Quantum Repeaters.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (Aug 2012), 070503. Issue 7. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.070503

[20] C. K. Hong, Z. Y. Ou, and L. Mandel. 1987. Measurement of subpicosecond time intervals between two photons by

interference. Phys. Rev. Lett. 59 (Nov 1987), 2044–2046. Issue 18. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.59.2044

[21] Michał Horodecki, Paweł Horodecki, and Ryszard Horodecki. 1997. Inseparable Two Spin- 1

2 Density Matrices Can Be

Distilled to a Singlet Form. Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 (Jan 1997), 574–577. Issue 4. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.78.574

[22] Jessica Illiano, Marcello Caleffi, Antonio Manzalini, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti. 2022. Quantum internet protocol

stack: A comprehensive survey. Computer Networks 213 (2022), 109092.

[23] Richard Jozsa. 1994. Fidelity for Mixed Quantum States.

Journal of Modern Optics 41, 12 (1994), 2315–2323.

arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/09500349414552171 doi:10.1080/09500349414552171

[24] Can M Knaut, Aziza Suleymanzade, Y-C Wei, Daniel R Assumpcao, P-J Stas, Yan Qi Huan, Bartholomeus Machielse,
Erik N Knall, Madison Sutula, Gefen Baranes, et al. 2024. Entanglement of nanophotonic quantum memory nodes in a
telecom network. Nature 629, 8012 (2024), 573–578.

[25] Viktor Krutyanskiy, Maria Galli, Vojtech Krcmarsky, Simon Baier, DA Fioretto, Yunfei Pu, Azadeh Mazloom, Pavel
Sekatski, Marco Canteri, Markus Teller, et al. 2023. Entanglement of trapped-ion qubits separated by 230 meters.
Physical Review Letters 130, 5 (2023), 050803.

[26] Stephan Kucera, Christian Haen, Elena Arenskötter, Tobias Bauer, Jonas Meiers, Marlon Schäfer, Ross Boland, Milad
Yahyapour, Maurice Lessing, Ronald Holzwarth, Christoph Becher, and Jürgen Eschner. 2024. Demonstration of
quantum network protocols over a 14-km urban fiber link. npj Quantum Information 10, 1 (Sept. 2024), 88. doi:10.1038/
s41534-024-00886-x

[27] Paul G Kwiat, Salvador Barraza-Lopez, Andre Stefanov, and Nicolas Gisin. 2001. Experimental entanglement distillation

and ‘hidden’non-locality. Nature 409, 6823 (2001), 1014–1017.

[28] Dong-Dong Li, Song Gao, Guo-Chun Li, Lu Xue, Li-Wei Wang, Chang-Bin Lu, Yao Xiang, Zi-Yan Zhao, Long-Chuan
Yan, Zhi-Yu Chen, Gang Yu, and Jian-Hong Liu. 2018. Field implementation of long-distance quantum key distribution
over aerial fiber with fast polarization feedback. Opt. Express 26, 18 (Sep 2018), 22793–22800. doi:10.1364/OE.26.022793
[29] Zhonghui Li, Kaiping Xue, Jian Li, Lutong Chen, Ruidong Li, Zhaoying Wang, Nenghai Yu, David S. L. Wei, Qibin
Sun, and Jun Lu. 2023. Entanglement-Assisted Quantum Networks: Mechanics, Enabling Technologies, Challenges,
and Research Directions. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 25, 4 (2023), 2133–2189. doi:10.1109/COMST.2023.
3294240

22

Connor Clayton et al.

[30] Zhen-Guo Li, Jun Mao, Yi-Jin Zhou, Jia-Wei Guo, Shi Chen, Hao Hao, Yang-Hui Huang, Sai-Ying Ru, Nai-Tao Liu,
Zhen Liu, Jie Deng, Fan Yang, Xue-Cou Tu, La-Bao Zhang, Xiao-Qing Jia, Jian Chen, Lin Kang, Jianwei Wang,
Qing-Yuan Zhao, Qihuang Gong, and Pei-Heng Wu. 2025. Surpassing 99% detection efficiency by cascading two
superconducting nanowires on one waveguide with self-calibration. Light: Science & Applications 14, 1 (Oct. 2025), 369.
doi:10.1038/s41377-025-02031-5

[31] Maciej Lipiński, Tomasz Włostowski, Javier Serrano, and Pablo Alvarez. 2011. White rabbit: A PTP application for
robust sub-nanosecond synchronization. In 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Precision Clock Synchronization for
Measurement, Control and Communication. IEEE, 25–30.

[32] D Main, P Drmota, DP Nadlinger, EM Ainley, A Agrawal, BC Nichol, R Srinivas, G Araneda, and DM Lucas. 2025.

Distributed quantum computing across an optical network link. Nature (2025), 1–6.

[33] Wayne McKenzie, Anne Marie Richards, Shirali Patel, Thomas Gerrits, T. G. Akin, Steven Peil, Adam T. Black, David
Tulchinsky, Alexander Hastings, Ya-Shian Li-Baboud, Anouar Rahmouni, Ivan A. Burenkov, Alan Mink, Matthew Diaz,
Nijil Lal, Yicheng Shi, Paulina Kuo, Pranish Shrestha, Mheni Merzouki, Alejandro Rodriguez Perez, Eleanya Onuma,
Daniel E. Jones, Atiyya A. Davis, Thomas A. Searles, J. D. Whalen, Qudsia Sara Quraishi, Kate S. Collins, La Vida
Cooper, Harry Shaw, Bruce Crabill, Oliver Slattery, and Abdella Battou. 2024. Clock synchronization characterization
of the Washington DC metropolitan quantum network (DC-QNet). Applied Physics Letters 125, 16 (Oct. 2024), 164004.
doi:10.1063/5.0225082

[34] C. M. Nunn, J. D. Franson, and T. B. Pittman. 2021. Heralding on the detection of zero photons. Phys. Rev. A 104 (Sep

2021), 033717. Issue 3. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.104.033717

[35] Jian-Wei Pan, Dik Bouwmeester, Harald Weinfurter, and Anton Zeilinger. 1998. Experimental entanglement swapping:

entangling photons that never interacted. Physical review letters 80, 18 (1998), 3891.

[36] Matteo Pompili, Carlo Delle Donne, Ingmar te Raa, Bart van der Vecht, Matthew Skrzypczyk, Guilherme Ferreira, Lisa
de Kluijver, Arian J Stolk, Sophie LN Hermans, Przemysław Pawełczak, et al. 2022. Experimental demonstration of
entanglement delivery using a quantum network stack. npj Quantum Information 8, 1 (2022), 121.

[37] Anouar Rahmouni, PS Kuo, Ya-Shian Li-Baboud, IA Burenkov, Yicheng Shi, MV Jabir, N Lal, Dileep Reddy, Mheni
Merzouki, Lijun Ma, et al. 2024. 100-km entanglement distribution with coexisting quantum and classical signals in a
single fiber. Journal of Optical Communications and Networking 16, 8 (2024), 781–787.

[38] Mohsen Razavi and Jeffrey H Shapiro. 2006. Long-distance quantum communication with neutral atoms. Physical

Review A—Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics 73, 4 (2006), 042303.

[39] Dileep V. Reddy, Robert R. Nerem, Sae Woo Nam, Richard P. Mirin, and Varun B. Verma. 2020. Superconducting
nanowire single-photon detectors with 98% system detection efficiency at 1550nm. Optica 7, 12 (Dec 2020), 1649–1653.
doi:10.1364/OPTICA.400751

[40] Davide Rusca and Nicolas Gisin. 2024. Quantum Cryptography: an overview of Quantum Key Distribution.

arXiv:2411.04044 [quant-ph] https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.04044

[41] Vinay Shankarkumar, Laurent Montini, Tim Frost, and Greg Dowd. 2017. Precision Time Protocol Version 2 (PTPv2)

Management Information Base. RFC 8173. doi:10.17487/RFC8173

[42] Shouqian Shi and Chen Qian. 2020. Concurrent Entanglement Routing for Quantum Networks: Model and Designs. In

Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM (Virtual Event, USA). 62–75. doi:10.1145/3387514.3405853

[43] Yicheng Shi, Jing Su, Anouar Rahmouni, Pranish Shrestha, Mheni Merzouki, Gabriel Bello Portmann, Anne Lazenby,
Mael Flament, Mehdi Namazi, Abdella Battou, et al. 2026. Entanglement distribution over a polarization-stabilized
aerial fiber. Journal of Optical Communications and Networking 18, 8 (2026), 813–819.

[44] Y. H. Shih and C. O. Alley. 1988. New Type of Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen-Bohm Experiment Using Pairs of Light
Issue 26.

Quanta Produced by Optical Parametric Down Conversion. Phys. Rev. Lett. 61 (Dec 1988), 2921–2924.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.61.2921

[45] P-J Stas, Y-C Wei, M Sirotin, YQ Huan, U Yazlar, F Abdo Arias, E Knyazev, G Baranes, B Machielse, S Grandi, et al. 2026.
Entanglement-assisted non-local optical interferometry in a quantum network. Nature 651, 8105 (2026), 326–332.
[46] E. Sutcliffe and A. Beghelli. 2023. Multiuser Entanglement Distribution in Quantum Networks Using Multipath Routing.

IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering 4, 01 (jan 2023), 1–15. doi:10.1109/TQE.2023.3329714

[47] Stephanie Wehner, David Elkouss, and Ronald Hanson. 2018. Quantum internet: A vision for the road ahead. Science

362, 6412 (2018), eaam9288.

[48] Shi-Hai Wei, Bo Jing, Xue-Ying Zhang, Jin-Yu Liao, Chen-Zhi Yuan, Bo-Yu Fan, Chen Lyu, Dian-Li Zhou, You Wang,
Guang-Wei Deng, Hai-Zhi Song, Daniel Oblak, Guang-Can Guo, and Qiang Zhou. 2022. Towards Real-World Quantum
Networks: A Review. Laser & Photonics Reviews 16, 3 (March 2022), 2100219. doi:10.1002/lpor.202100219

[49] William K Wootters and Wojciech H Zurek. 1982. A single quantum cannot be cloned. Nature 299, 5886 (1982),

802–803.

[50] Zheshen Zhang and Quntao Zhuang. 2021. Distributed quantum sensing. Quantum Science and Technology 6, 4 (jul

2021), 043001. doi:10.1088/2058-9565/abd4c3

Rate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

23

Fig. 10. A more detailed diagram of the entanglement source sketched in Figure 3.

A DETAILS OF ENTANGLEMENT SOURCES
This section provides additional detail on the SPDC setup beyond the simplified diagram introduced
in Figure 3. As a general overview: the SPDC process occurs within some nonlinear media, whereby
high-energy pump photons are converted into lower-energy, entangled photon pairs. Additional
components are then used to harness entanglement in the desired degree of freedom. Each of these
aspects is detailed below for our source.

The full experimental setup is shown in Figure 10. A mode-locked pump laser generates pulses
at a repetition rate of 76.142 MHz. Pump power control is executed via a variable beam splitter
(VBS) consisting of an adjustable half wave plate (HWP) followed by a polarization beam splitter
(PBS). Adjusting the angle of the HWP changes the amount of pump light that used for SPDC.

The pump pulses then enter a periodically poled potassium titanyl phosphate (PPKTP) non-linear
crystal which serves as a medium for the SPDC process. The crystal is engineered to convert
pump photons with central wavelength 775 nm into photon pairs centered at 1550 nm. With some
probability (~10−4 per pulse), a pair of photons with orthogonal polarization states are generated,
separated from the pump with spectral filters, and then split at a PBS. One of the photons passes
through a HWP to (optionally) put both photons into the same polarization state.

The photons are coupled from free space into single-mode fiber and interfered at a 50:50 fiber-
based beam splitter (BS) [44]. Interference is maximized through tuning of a variable delay (Δ𝑡) to
ensure photons arrive simultaneously, and a manual polarization controller (PC) to maintain photon
polarizations in fiber. Finally, the entangled photons propagate to the receiver. The analyzers set
polarization bases {𝜑𝐴, 𝜑𝐵 }, and detection events at each SNSPD are timestamped with a time
tagger (not shown) to count coincident detections. Through multiple measurements in different
bases [2], the receiver fully reconstructs the state of the polarization-entangled photons.

B DETAILS OF ENTANGLEMENT SOURCE MODELING
This Appendix includes more complete data used for SPDC and four-wave mixing source charac-
terizations and development of the corresponding source models.

B.1 SPDC Source
Extending the main body plots from Figure 4a, additional information from the same data sets is
shown in Figure 11a. This includes measurements at lower powers 5 mW and 10 mW, and raw
count rates are shown without normalization. The four shown data sets correspond to measurement
sequences taken on different days with slightly different conditions: green squares and orange
circles on one day; purple diamonds and red triangles at a later date. Variations between trials are
related to unstabilized polarization drift in the source-detector setup shown in Figure 10, which is
elaborated upon below.

Entanglement generation rates are clearly consistent between data sets taken subsequent trials
on the same day, but not on different days. This indicates different overall loss between source

24

Connor Clayton et al.

(a) Full SPDC source characterization.

(b) Full commercial four-wave mixing source charac-
terization.

Fig. 11. Extension of source characterizations in Figure 4 including all collected data.

and receiver, largely attributed to the polarization-dependent SNSPD detection efficiency. The
fibers between the analyzers and detectors are relatively stable over the course of one day, but
not over longer time scales. The same is true (to a lesser extent) of the coupling efficiency from
free space into fiber, which may have also reduced the overall efficiency in the later data sets. This
combined effect simulates different link losses between source and receiver, so normalization is
used to represent the underlying source dependence on pump power in Figure 4a.

State fidelity is also largely consistent between data sets, but with some increased variability
between measurements taken on the same day. This is because entanglement is generated from
quantum interference at a 50:50 beamsplitter, which is highly sensitive to the polarization of the
incoming photons — more sensitive than the SNSPD efficiency dependence. We characterize the
quality of interference with the Hong-Ou-Mandel (HOM) effect [20], observing about 96% and
93% visibility for the two different days. This value is limited by the ability to manually match
polarization states in fiber via polarization controller (PC). This in turn limits the state fidelity at
low powers, as seen at the top of Figure 10, and is also affected by drift, causing higher variability
between trials.

Altogether, rates exhibit a clear linear trend over all measured pump powers, while fidelity shows
no significant change until around 25 mW (for a given data set), above which multipair effects
become significant and degrade fidelity. This defines an operable regime (25 mW to 300 mW) over
which decreasing rate returns a consistent increase in state fidelity, offering a useful tradeoff that
can be leveraged in our control protocol.

B.2 Four-Wave Mixing Source
In Figure 4b we presented source characterization data for a Qunnect Qu-SRC [11] which generates
pairs of polarization-entangled photons via four-wave mixing (FWM) in warm atomic vapor. We
received this characterization data directly from the device manufacturer. The full (non-normalized)
data is presented in Figure 11b.

0.800.850.900.951.00Fidelity050100150200250300Pump Power (mW)0200040006000EntanglementGeneration Rate (pairs/s)0.9800.9850.9900.9951.000Fidelity012345Pump Power (mW)51015EntanglementGeneration Rate (pairs/s)×106Rate-Fidelity Control for Wide-Area Quantum Links

25

Fig. 12. Histograms of APC compensation times generated by Algorithm 1 and experiment.

Note the given SPDC rates include all optical losses incurred by the apparatus in Fig. 10, while this
commercial FWM source is highly optimized. As a result, the commercial source emits photonic Bell
states at a rate several orders of magnitude higher and an error rate one order of magnitude lower
than our in-house SPDC-based source. The output photons also have much different wavelength
characteristics: the SPDC source emits degenerate photons with the same center wavelength (1550
nm); the FWM source emits non-degenerate photon pairs with wavelengths 795 nm and 1324
nm, each with a much narrower spectral band. These spectral properties will result in completely
different polarization drift due to the dispersive properties of optical fiber. To translate our model to
a new source, drift characterization similar to Fig. 7 would be required for the relevant wavelengths,
although we can expect similar dependence of drift rate on environmental conditions.

C FIT OF APC MODEL TO EXPERIMENTAL DATA
Our empirically-derived model of polarization compensation in the Qunnect APC, presented in
Section 3.3, assumes Riemannian gradient descent and a noise term that counteracts the improve-
ments gained in each gradient descent step. We fit our model to 70 hours of experimental data
over a similar link and determined a gradient descent step size of 𝜂 = 0.062 and a step duration of
Δ = 27.7ms. Figure 12 compares the histogram of compensation durations from the experimental
APC dataset with a histogram derived from our simulations, which use our model on the data
shown in Figure 5. Visual comparison demonstrates reasonable empirical fit.

D COMPUTING THE FIDELITY CHECK CONDITION
Here we discuss the computation of the quantity Λ1 −Λ2 introduced in Section 5.3. Λ1 −Λ2 quantifies
the throughput gain of performing a fidelity check: Λ1 is the expected throughput if we perform
the check, and Λ2 is the throughput if we don’t perform the check.

Let 𝑒 denote the time elapsed since the last fidelity check and 𝑇eff the expected time until the
next fidelity check. Let 𝑟 (𝐹pol) denote the rate achieved when the polarization fidelity is predicted
to be 𝐹pol. Let 𝑡check denote the duration of a fidelity check.

To ease the notation in this discussion, we define (cid:164)𝑟 (𝑡) := 𝑟 (𝑡0 + 𝑡) where the most recent fidelity

check occurred at time 𝑡0 — i.e., (cid:164)𝑟 (𝑡) is the rate 𝑡 seconds after the last check.

0500100015002000Compensation Time (ms)0.0000.0010.0020.0030.0040.0050.006DensityExperimentalModeled26

Connor Clayton et al.

The first important realization is that we can always compute the rate (cid:164)𝑟 (𝑡) for 𝑡 > 0 up until
the next fidelity check. Intuitively this must be true: we learn no information about the system
between fidelity checks, so we should be able to predict all protocol behavior until the next check.
Indeed, (cid:164)𝑟 (𝑡) is determined by the pump power, which in turn is determined by our prediction of
𝐹pol at time 𝑡 (see Section 5.2), so we can project (cid:164)𝑟 (𝑡) by querying our polarization drift prediction
model. We employ this rate projection to estimate 𝑇eff by finding the time at which the condition in
Equation 7 is met and taking the minimum of this quantity and the time since the last check.

Given this, Λ2 is easy to compute by noticing that
∫ 𝑒+𝑇eff

Λ2 =

𝑒

(cid:164)𝑟 (𝑡)𝑑𝑡

(8)

Next, we estimate Λ1. We assume that the rate curve (cid:164)𝑟after-check (𝑡) after a hypothetical fidelity
check would follow the same trend as the current (cid:164)𝑟 (𝑡) with an offset depending on the expected
true polarization fidelity E[𝐹pol]. We compute E[𝐹pol] by querying our drift prediction model with
𝛿 = 0.5 (50th percentile drift). We can now estimate Λ1:

∫ 𝑇eff −𝑡check

0
∫ 𝑇eff −𝑡check

Λ1 =

≈

0

(cid:164)𝑟after-check (𝑡)𝑑𝑡

(cid:164)𝑟 (𝑡) − (cid:2) (cid:164)𝑟 (0) − (cid:164)𝑟 (E[𝐹pol])(cid:3)𝑑𝑡

(9)

(10)

This uses the same projection of (cid:164)𝑟 (𝑡) that we used to compute Λ2. Note that we only need to

perform the calculations here once per fidelity check.

E DERIVATION OF OPTIMAL COMPENSATION TIMING
Here we derive Equation 7, which states the condition under which a protocol should initiate a
polarization compensation routine. First, we approximate the objective of maximizing end-to-end
rate by a greedy strategy of maximizing the rate of each period individually (from the end of one
calibration routine to the end of the next).

Suppose each compensation routine takes time 𝑐, the previous routine ended at time 𝑡0, 𝑟 (𝑡) is
the entanglement distribution rate at time 𝑡, and ¯𝑟 (𝑡) is the average rate of the period if we were to
perform a compensation routine at time 𝑡. Then the objective is to maximize

¯𝑟 (𝑡) =

1
(𝑡 − 𝑡0) + 𝑐

∫ 𝑡

𝑡0

𝑟 (𝑡)𝑑𝑡

0 =

=

𝑑
𝑑𝑡 ¯𝑟 (𝑡)
(𝑐 + 𝑡 − 𝑡0)𝑟 (𝑡) − ∫ 𝑡
𝑡0
(𝑐 + 𝑡 − 𝑡0)2

𝑟 (𝑡)𝑑𝑡

A maximum must satisfy

which has a unique solution at

(11)

𝑟 (𝑡) =

1
𝑐 + 𝑡 − 𝑡0

∫ 𝑡

𝑟 (𝑡)𝑑𝑡 = ¯𝑟 (𝑡)

(12)

𝑡0
¯𝑟 (𝑡) is increasing at 𝑡 = 0, so assuming decreasing 𝑟 (𝑡), which is generally true as we generally
lower pump power and therefore 𝑟 (𝑡) throughout a period, ¯𝑟 (𝑡) is maximized by 𝑡 satisfying
Equation 12 maximizes.

