An operating system for executing 
applications on quantum network nodes

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-08704-w

Received: 17 July 2024

Accepted: 27 January 2025

Published online: 12 March 2025

Open access

 Check for updates

C. Delle Donne1,2,3,8, M. Iuliano1,2,8, B. van der Vecht1,2,3,8, G. M. Ferreira1,2, H. Jirovská1,2, 
T. J. W. van der Steenhoven1,2, A. Dahlberg1,2,3, M. Skrzypczyk1,2,3, D. Fioretto4, M. Teller4, 
P. Filippov4, A. R.-P. Montblanch1,2, J. Fischer1,2, H. B. van Ommen1,2, N. Demetriou1,2, 
D. Leichtle5, L. Music5, H. Ollivier6, I. te Raa1,2, W. Kozlowski1,2, T. H. Taminiau1,2, P. Pawełczak7, 
T. E. Northup4, R. Hanson1,2 & S. Wehner1,2,3 ✉

The goal of future quantum networks is to enable new internet applications that  
are impossible to achieve using only classical communication1–3. Up to now, 
demonstrations of quantum network applications4–6 and functionalities7–12 on 
quantum processors have been performed in ad hoc software that was specific to  
the experimental setup, programmed to perform one single task (the application 
experiment) directly into low-level control devices using expertise in experimental 
physics. Here we report on the design and implementation of an architecture capable 
of executing quantum network applications on quantum processors in platform-
independent high-level software. We demonstrate the capability of the architecture to 
execute applications in high-level software by implementing it as a quantum network 
operating system—QNodeOS—and executing test programs, including a delegated 
computation from a client to a server13 on two quantum network nodes based on 
nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centres in diamond14,15. We show how our architecture allows 
us to maximize the use of quantum network hardware by multitasking different 
applications. Our architecture can be used to execute programs on any quantum 
processor platform corresponding to our system model, which we illustrate by 
demonstrating an extra driver for QNodeOS for a trapped-ion quantum network node 
based on a single 40Ca+ atom16. Our architecture lays the groundwork for computer 
science research in quantum network programming and paves the way for the 
development of software that can bring quantum network technology to society.

The first quantum networks linking several quantum processors as 
end nodes have recently been realized as physics experiments in labo-
ratories17–23 and fibre networks24–26, opening the possibility of realizing 
advanced quantum network applications2 such as data consistency in 
the cloud27, privacy-enhancing proofs of deletion28, exponential savings 
in communication29 or secure quantum computing in the cloud13,30. 
Demonstrations either relied on ad hoc software or chose to establish 
that hardware parameters were, in principle, good enough to support 
a given quantum network application, although the application itself 
was not realized6,31,32. Although quantum nodes have been linked at the 
hardware level17–26,33, including the design34–37 and realization38,39 of net-
work stacks to manage entanglement generation, a critical innovation 
required to make quantum networks useful is lacking: an architecture 
enabling the execution of quantum applications.

It is a notable challenge to design and implement an architecture that 
can enable the execution of arbitrary quantum network applications 
on quantum processor end nodes (Fig. 1) while enabling program-
ming in high-level software that neither depends on the underlying 

quantum hardware nor requires the programmer to understand the 
physics of the underlying devices. In the domain of the conventional 
internet, the possibility of programming arbitrary internet applica-
tions in high-level software has led to the realization of radically new 
communication applications by diverse communities, which had a 
transformative impact on our society40. What’s more, the advent of 
programmable hardware and new application areas sparked new fields 
of computer science research and guided further hardware develop-
ment (for example, network programming and protocols, distrib-
uted systems, internet of things and more). A similar development is 
underway in quantum computing, in which the availability of high-level 
programming  tools  allows  a  broad  participation  in  developing  
applications41.

In realizing the first such system architecture, we overcome all chal-
lenges below, including both fundamental challenges that are inherent 
to quantum network applications at any scale, as well as technologi-
cal challenges that arise from the current state of the art of quantum 
network hardware.

1QuTech, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands. 2Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands. 3Quantum Computer Science, Department 
of Software Technology, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer Science, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands. 4Institut für Experimentalphysik, 
Universität Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. 5LIP6, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France. 6QAT, DIENS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL University, CNRS, INRIA, Paris, France. 7Embedded 
Systems, Department of Software Technology, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer Science, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands. 8These authors 
contributed equally: C. Delle Donne, M. Iuliano, B. van der Vecht. ✉e-mail: s.d.c.wehner@tudelft.nl

Nature  |  Vol 639  |  13 March 2025  |  321

Articlecomputing do not address the execution of quantum network applica-
tions. We thus have to define a hardware abstraction layer capable of 
interfacing with quantum network processors, including present-day 
setups.

Timescales
It is a fundamental challenge that different parts of such a system oper-
ate at vastly different timescales. For nodes separated by hundreds of 
kilometres, the duration of network operations is in the millisecond (ms)  
regime and some applications2 need substantial local classical proce-
ssing (ms). By contrast, the time to execute quantum operations on 
processing nodes is in the regime of microseconds (μs) and the low-level 
control (including timing synchronization between neighbouring 
nodes to generate entanglement50) requires nanosecond (ns) precision.

Memory lifetimes
Present-day quantum network nodes have short coherence times, pos-
ing a technological challenge to ensure that operations are executed 
within the timeframe allowed by the quantum memory.

Scheduling local and network operations
Entanglement is a key resource for quantum network applications2. 
In contrast to classical networking, entanglement is a form of stateful 
connection already at the physical layer in which both nodes hold one 
qubit. Our architecture should allow for the execution of applications 
at end nodes, and these may be separated by a large quantum network 
that facilitates entanglement generation between them. This can be 
achieved by the implementation of a network stack34,35. A technologi-
cal challenge arises in the integration of such a network stack with the 
application stack of QNodeOS when using heralded entanglement 
generation at the physical layer34 (as done in all current demonstrations 
linking quantum processors25,38). Heralded entanglement generation 
requires agreement between neighbouring network nodes to trigger 
entanglement generation in precise time bins34, organized into a net-
work schedule51 that dictates when nodes make entanglement. Such a 
schedule could be set by a centralized controller51 or by a distributed 
protocol (see, for example, ref. 34).

It is a technological challenge to manage the interdependencies 
between the schedule of local operations, and the networked opera-
tions, because, in all current processing node implementations22,52, 
entanglement generation cannot be performed simultaneously with 
local operations22,53. Although interdependencies may be mitigated in 
the future54, this implies that we cannot schedule (that is, decide when 
to execute) the execution of local quantum operations independently 
of the network schedule.

Multitasking
When executing (quantum) network applications, one node is typically 
idle while waiting for the other node before it can continue execution. 
For example, a client program may need to wait for a server to finish 
processing and send a message. It is hence a fundamental challenge how 
we can increase the utility of the system by performing multitasking55,56, 
that is, allowing the concurrent execution of several programs at once 
to make use of idle times. Consequently, there is a need for managing 
state and resources for several independent programs, including pro-
cesses, quantum memory management and entanglement requests.

Architecture
We divide the architecture logically into three main components (Fig. 2; 
Methods): the classical network processing unit (CNPU) is the logical 
element responsible for starting the execution of programs and the 
execution of classical code blocks; the quantum network process-
ing unit (QNPU, realized on classical hardware) is the logical element 
responsible for governing the execution of the quantum code blocks; 

Fig. 1 | Application paradigm. A quantum networking application consists  
of several programs, each running on one of the end nodes59. An end node is a 
device in a quantum network that executes user applications. A network stack 
enables entanglement generation between end nodes over a quantum network 
(Supplementary Fig. 1). The distinct programs at each end node can only interact 
through: (1) quantum communication (for example, entanglement generation) 
and (2) classical communication. This allows a programmer to realize security-
sensitive applications but prohibits a global orchestration of the quantum 
execution, such as what we might do in (distributed) quantum computing70 in 
which a single quantum program is executed on several nodes. Our architecture 
allows programs to be written in high-level quantum-hardware-independent 
software and executed on a quantum-hardware-independent system that 
controls a hardware-dependent system (QDevice; Fig. 2), such as a NV centre 
node with a diamond chip (photo taken by authors, left images) or a trapped-ion 
quantum node60 (right images). These platforms constitute physically very 
different QDevice systems but can both be programmed by our architecture.

Design considerations and challenges
Interactive classical-quantum execution
The execution of quantum network applications requires a continuing 
interaction between the quantum and classical parts of the execution, 
including interactions between different programs (Fig. 1). For example, 
during secure quantum computing in the cloud13,42, the program on the 
server is waiting for classical messages from a remote client program 
before continuing the quantum execution at the server. This is in sharp 
contrast to quantum computing applications, in which a quantum 
application is a single program that can be executed in one batch, with-
out the need to keep quantum states live while waiting for input from 
other programs. In quantum computing, only relatively low level and 
predictable interactions between classical and quantum processing 
are realized, such as in quantum error correction43 or mid-circuit meas-
urements44. Higher-level classical-quantum interactions in quantum 
computing45 do not keep qubits live in memory.

We assume that the programs are divided into classical and quan-
tum blocks of instructions (by a programmer or a compiler). Classical 
blocks consist of local classical operations executed on a conventional 
classical processor, as well as networked classical operations (that is, 
sending messages to remote nodes) executed using network devices. 
Quantum blocks consist of local quantum operations (gates, measure-
ments, classical control logic), as well as networked quantum opera-
tions (entanglement generation) executed on quantum hardware.  
A single quantum block, in essence, corresponds to a program in quan-
tum computing and may contain simple classical control logic, such 
as for the purpose of mid-circuit measurements44.

Different hardware platforms
Interfacing with different hardware platforms presents technological 
challenges: at present, a clear line between software and hardware has 
not been defined, and the low-level control of present-day quantum 
processor hardware has been built to conduct physics experiments. 
Early microarchitectures46,47 and operating systems48,49 for quantum 

322  |  Nature  |  Vol 639  |  13 March 2025

ArticleApplicationQuantum hardwaredependentQuantum hardwareindependentProgramQuantum hardwareindependentProgramQuantum hardwaredependentNetworkNode 1Node 2Classical message-passingEntanglementgenerationClient

Heralding station

SNSPD

TT

CPLD

Heralding signal

Server

a

b

To remote
CNPU

CNPU

QNPU

QNodeOS

QDevice

AWG

MCU

QNodeOS

CNPU

User program

CNPU runtime

Quantum blocks

Co-processor driver

Classical
processing

NetQASM interface

QNPU

CNPU communication handler

Quantum block

Quantum
operations

Entanglement
requests

Flow control
logic

QNPU core

Entanglement requests

Network stack

Flow control logic

Local processor

To next hop’s
QNPU

Quantum operations

QDriver

QDevice interface (physical instructions)

QDevice

QDevice
processing
stack

Classical channel interface

Quantum channel interface

To next hop’s
QDevice

CNPU

QNPU

AWG

MCU

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n

i

e
r
a
w
d
r
a
h
m
u
t
n
a
u
Q

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
h
m
u
t
n
a
u
Q

Fig. 2 | QNodeOS architecture. a, QNodeOS consists of a classical network 
processing unit (CNPU) and a quantum network processing unit (QNPU) 
(classical system). QNodeOS controls a QDevice (quantum hardware and 
low-level classical control). b, Schematic of our implementation of QNodeOS 
on a two-node setup in which both QDevices control a single qubit in a diamond 
NV centre. The CNPU is implemented on a general-purpose PC and the QNPU  
on an embedded system, connected by means of Gigabit Ethernet (blue). The 
QNPU connects to its QDevice by means of a serial peripheral interface (SPI) 
(pink). The two QNPUs (brown) and the two CNPUs (green) connect to each 

other by means of Gigabit Ethernet. The setup is based on ref. 38 with two 
QDevices (including AWGs and microcontroller units (MCUs); QDevices 
communicating over a classical digital input/output (DIO) interface) and a 
heralding station composed of a balanced 50:50 beam splitter (whose output 
ports are connected to superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors 
(SNSPDs) through optical fibres (red)), a time tagger (TT) and a complex 
programmable logic device (CPLD) that heralds the entanglement generation 
between QDevices and sends a classical message to the MCU.

the CNPU and the QNPU together form QNodeOS and control the  
QDevice, which is responsible for executing any quantum operations 
(gates, measurements, entanglement generation at the physical layer34) 
on the quantum hardware. On starting the execution, the CNPU creates 
a process (a well-known concept in classical operating systems57,58) 
on the CNPU (a CNPU process), registers the program on the QNPU 
(through the QNPU’s end node application programming interface 
(API), Supplementary Information section 2.2), which, in turn, creates 
its own associated QNPU process (including context such as process 
owner, ID, process state and priority). QNodeOS also defines kernel 
processes on the QNPU, which are similar to user processes but are 
created when the system starts (on boot). The CNPU sends quantum 
blocks to the QNPU in the form of NetQASM subroutines59. Classical 
control logic in quantum blocks is executed by the QNPU processor. 
Quantum gates and measurements (from any QNPU process) and 
entanglement instructions (from the network process) are delegated 
to the QDevice by submitting physical instructions (Methods), after 
which the QDevice responds back to the QNPU with the result of the 
instruction (Supplementary Information).

To enable different hardware platforms, we introduce a QDriver real-
izing the hardware abstraction layer for any hardware corresponding 
to our minimal QDevice system model (Methods). The QDriver is the 
only hardware-dependent element of the architecture and is respon-
sible for translating quantum operations, expressed in NetQASM59, 
into platform-dependent (streams of) physical instructions to the 
underlying QDevice. We realize a QDriver for the trapped-ion system 

of refs. 60,61 and one for NV centres in diamond based on the system 
of refs. 7,22,38. We validate the trapped-ion QDriver (Fig. 3) by imple-
menting and verifying a set of single-qubit gate operations (Methods) 
and the QDriver on the NV system as part of the full-stack system evalu-
ation (see below).

To allow for different timescales, we logically divide the architecture 
into CNPU, QNPU and QDevice, which can thus be realized at different 
timescale granularities. In our proof-of-concept implementation, we 
realize the CNPU and QNPU on different devices, reflecting the millisec-
ond timescales of communication between distant nodes (Methods).
Ensuring the necessary interactivity requires architectural as well 
as implementation choices: as programs may depend on messages 
from remote nodes, the architecture needs to be able to dynamically 
handle both classical and quantum blocks, even if not known at runtime. 
Consequently, it is not possible to preload all quantum blocks of the 
program into the low-level controller of the QDevice ahead of time, as 
done in previous physics experiments. Instead, in our system model, 
the QDevice is capable of executing individual physical instructions 
similar to a classical CPU. Consequently, the QNPU is continuously 
ready to receive new NetQASM subroutines from the CNPU and the 
QDevice can continuously receive and respond to physical instructions 
from the QNPU (Methods).

In our NV QDevice implementation, we address the challenge of 
interactivity by interleaving specific user-requested pulse sequences 
(realizing physical instructions sent from QNodeOS) and dynami-
cal decoupling (DD) sequences (protecting quantum memory from 

Nature  |  Vol 639  |  13 March 2025  |  323

 
 
 
 
Node 1

QNodeOS

QDriver

Emulator

FPGA

DDS

QDevice

PMT

Fig. 3 | Trapped-ion QDevice implementation. Schematic of our 
implementation of QNodeOS on a single-node setup in which the QDevice 
contains a single trapped-ion qubit. The QNPU QDriver is implemented on a 
field-programmable gate array (FPGA) that connects to its QDevice through  
a SPI (Methods). The setup consists of an emulator that translates between  
SPI messages and TTL signals, experimental control hardware that includes  
a FPGA and direct digital synthesis (DDS) modules, a trapped-ion qubit60  
under ultrahigh vacuum (Fig. 1) and a photomultiplier tube (PMT) that registers 
atomic fluorescence.

decoherence) in an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG)62. The DD 
sequences extend qubit coherence times up to Tcoh = 13(2) ms, while 
arbitrary physical instructions can be handled by triggering the corre-
sponding pulse sequence, without knowing them in advance (Methods).
To integrate local operations with the network schedule, our archi-
tecture first introduces a QNPU scheduler that can choose which of the 
ready processes is assigned to the local processor (Fig. 2; Methods) and 
QDevice. This allows interleaving the execution of different processes 
directly on the QNPU without incurring delays on the timescale of 
the CNPU (ms), addressing the challenge of short coherence times. 
In our implementation, we choose to schedule QNPU processes using 
a priority-based non-pre-emptive scheduler63, owing to limited quan-
tum memory lifetimes, which make it undesirable to pre-empt and 
temporarily store quantum states while halting the execution. Sec-
ond, we realize a network process as a kernel process, which manages 
entanglement generation using the network stack34,35 (implemented in 
ref. 38 without the ability to execute network applications). Although 
our architecture can work with any way of setting a network schedule, 
in our implementation we choose to determine the schedule using a 
time-division multiple access controller51, allowing the schedule to be 
centrally optimized to mitigate present-day memory decoherence. 
The network process handles entanglement requests submitted by 
user processes, coordinates entanglement generation with the rest 
of the network through the time-division multiple access controller, 
interacts with the QDevice and eventually returns entangled qubits 
to user processes. User processes enter the waiting state when they 
need entanglement and become ready again once entanglement was 
delivered. The network process has the highest scheduling priority and, 
consequently, is given precedence over the execution of any local quan-
tum operations. We remark that local operations may still be executed 
during time bins already occupied by the network schedule, if a running 
non-pre-emptable user process prevents the network process from 
running, as we indeed observe in our evaluation.

324  |  Nature  |  Vol 639  |  13 March 2025

To increase utility, QNodeOS allows several programs to be run con-
currently, using the QNPU scheduler from above to enable multitask-
ing55,56 user processes on the QNPU itself. The QNPU hence needs to keep 
context for each process, including a virtual quantum memory space (as 
in classical operating systems64). Similar to classical memory manage-
ment systems65, a quantum memory management unit (QMMU) on the 
QNPU manages qubit allocations from processes and translates virtual 
qubit addresses in NetQASM subroutines to physical addresses in the 
QDevice. This allows flexibility in translating a virtual qubit address 
to: (1) a different physical qubit address over time, allowing qubits 
to be rearranged transparently in the physical memory in the future 
or (2) a logical qubit address when QNodeOS is executed on top of a 
processor using quantum error correction43 (Methods). Entanglement 
generation between different pairs of processes at remote nodes are 
distinguished by entanglement request sockets, inspired by classical 
sockets66,67, which are established once a user process requests entan-
glement from the network process. In our implementation, processes 
of the same priority are scheduled first-come-first-served65, where the 
total schedule of the program in our implementation is dependent on 
both the schedule on the CNPU as well as that on the QNPU (Methods).

Demonstrations
Delegated computation
We first validate our architecture and implementation by the first suc-
cessful execution of an arbitrary—that is, not preloaded—execution 
of a quantum network application in high-level software on quantum 
processors. We implement QNodeOS on a two-node setup of NV centres 
using one qubit per node (Fig. 1; Methods). We choose to execute an 
elementary form of delegated quantum computation (DQC)13 from a 
client to a server, because the client and server programs jointly real-
ize repetitions of a circuit (Fig. 4a) that triggers all parts of our system 
(Fig. 4c).

We first verify that the quantum result (fidelity) was found to be above 
the classical bound68 >2/3, which verifies that QNodeOS can successfully 
handle interactive applications consisting of entanglement generation, 
millisecond-scale memory lifetimes and classical message-passing. The 
non-perfect fidelity (Fig. 4b) comes mainly from two sources: a noisy 
entangled state with fidelity 0.72(2) (quantum hardware limitation) 
and decoherence in the server qubit (depending on Tcoh) as a result of 
waiting for several milliseconds (classical software latencies; Fig. 4d).
We proceed to characterize latencies. As expected, we find that the 
duration the server qubit must remain alive is dominated (>50%) by pro-
cessing in the CNPU, which could be improved by caching the prepara-
tion of S2 and implementing the CNPU and the QNPU on one board (see 
‘Outlook’ section). We observe that CNPU processing time varies greatly 
(standard deviation 30%; Supplementary Information section 4.6)  
owing to limited scheduling control over CNPU processes (Methods). 
Using an a priori estimate of what delays lead to too low a quality of 
execution (that is, delays that are too long for the server qubit to be 
stored with sufficiently high quality), we discard application iterations 
in which the CNPU latencies spiked by more than 8.95 ms. This leads 
to the discarding of 2% of iterations in post-processing (Methods).

Demonstration of multitasking
We also validate the multitasking capability of QNodeOS by the first 
concurrent execution of two quantum applications on a quantum net-
work: the DQC application and a single-node local gate tomography 
(LGT) application on the client (Fig. 5a). The two programs for the client 
are started in the CNPU at the same time (two CNPU processes, subject 
to the CNPU scheduler), which means that the QNPU continuously 
receives subroutines for both programs from the CNPU (two QNPU 
processes and corresponding subroutines, subject to the QNPU sched-
uler). This leads to a multitasking challenge directly on the QNPU to 
schedule the different subroutines received (Fig. 5b). Because the client 

ArticleFig. 4 | Delegated computation between two NV centre nodes using 
QNodeOS. a, DQC circuit (effective computation: single-qubit rotation R Z(α); 
Methods). The DQC application consists of k circuit repetitions (varying 
measurement bases for tomography on |ψ⟩) realized by two programs: the 
DQC-client program (client node, repeating the sequence ‘quantum block  
(C1, orange)–classical block (computing δ)’ k times) and the DQC-server 
program (server node, repeating ‘quantum block (S1, blue)–classical block 
(receiving δ)–quantum block (S2, purple)’ k times). Client and server produce 
entanglement |Φ+⟩ = (|00⟩ + |11⟩)/√2 (S1 and first part of C1). The client performs 
gates and a measurement, resulting in outcome bit mc (rest of C1). Client 
computes δ from mc and DQC parameters α ∈ [0, 2π) and θ ∈ [0, 2π) and sends δ. 
Meanwhile, the server keeps its qubit coherent. On receiving δ, the server applies 
gates depending on δ, resulting in single-qubit state |ψ⟩ (S2) depending only  
on α and θ. b, Experimental results executing DQC for six different sets of (α, θ) 
parameters (k = 1,200, that is, 7,200 executions of circuit Fig. 4a). Fidelity to |ψ⟩ 
estimated using single-qubit tomography (1,200 measurement results per data 
point) and corrected for known tomography errors (SSRO, blue), post-selected 

for charge-resonance (CR) check validation (purple) and post-selected for 
latencies (orange) (Methods). c, Sequence diagram including the interaction 
CNPU–QNPU–QDevice for one execution of the DQC circuit (repeated k = 1,200 
times in each experiment) (time flows to the right; not to scale). CNPUs prepare 
NetQASM subroutines (C1, S1, S2) and send them to their respective QNPUs. 
CNPUs perform classical computation (message δ). QNPUs execute subroutines, 
sending physical instructions to their QDevices. Entanglement is generated by 
QDevices performing a batch of attempts (triggered by a ‘create EPR’ physical 
instuction), resulting in the heralding of a two-qubit entangled state rotated  
to |Φ+⟩ by the server. d, Processing times and latencies while server qubit  
is live (time frame red line in c, averaged over all 7,200 circuit executions  
except executions with latency spikes; see Methods), including CNPU–QNPU 
communication latencies, CNPU processing on both nodes and client–server 
communication latency (CC) (average total of about 4.8(±0.8) ms; error  
bars (standard deviation) for the sum of individual segments (per segment: 
Supplementary Information section 4.6)).

Nature  |  Vol 639  |  13 March 2025  |  325

mcClientqubitServerqubitWait for  Await RY(π/2)RX()Compute and send =  –  + mcπSubroutine C1Subroutine S1Subroutine S2ms|〉0.550.600.650.700.750.80Fidelity (SSRO corrected)Only SSROCR filteredLatency filteredS2ServerCNPUServerQNPUServerQDevice‘S1 finished’Execute C1S2 result: msMeasureRotateClientCNPUClientQNPUClientQDeviceC1RotateMeasureExecute S2Execute S1Compute PrepareS1Prepare C1CreateEPREPRsuccessCreateEPREPRsuccessQubit createdQubit measured...AttemptsC1 result: mcLive server qubitPrepare S2S10123456Duration (ms)ClientServerAwait  Prepare S2CCEPR success until S1 finishQNPU → CNPU latencyCNPU → QNPU latencyS2 start until measurementEPR success until C1 finishCompute abcdEntangle (   +)RX(π)RY(π/2)RZ()RX(π)(π/2, π/4)(π/2, π/2)(π, π/4)(π, π/2)(π, π)(π/2, π)(, )Rotate to +Fig. 5 | Multitasking experiment on two NV centres with QNodeOS. a, LGT 
circuit. A single NetQASM subroutine (L1) executes six times for bases B ∈  
{±X, ±Y, ±Z}: initialize to |0⟩, rotate around axis D ∈ {X, Y} by angle ϕ, measure in B. 
The LGT application consists of a single LGT program, submitting L1 to the 
QNPU (fixed D and ϕ) k times successively. b, Sequence diagram illustrating 
concurrent execution (multitasking) of DQC (Fig. 4) and LGT on the client: two 
DQC circuit repetitions (Fig. 4a; two subroutines on the client (orange), four on 
the server (blue and purple)) and three LGT circuit repetitions (three subroutines, 
green). The client QNPU receives subroutines for the DQC program and the LGT 
program, which the QNPU scheduler can interleave: while the server executes 
S2 (purple), the client can not yet execute the next S1 (orange), as it involves joint 
entanglement generation. In idle time, the client can execute LGT subroutines 
(number can vary). c, Results of multitasking LGT (client) and DQC (on both 
server and client): for each input pair (D, ϕ) ∈ {(X, 0), (X, π), (Y, π/2), (Y, −π/2), 
(X, −π/2), (X, π/2)} (six cardinal states {±X, ±Y, ±Z}): simultaneously (1) a single 
LGT program was initiated on the client (k = 1,000); (2) a single DQC-client 

program was initiated on the client (k = 200 successive subroutines); and  
(3) a single DQC-server program was initiated on the server (k = 200, that is, 400 
successive subroutines), resulting in a total of 6,000 LGT subroutine executions 
and 36,000 LGT measurement results, yielding fidelity estimates for the LGT 
quantum state before measurement. The results are the same as running LGT 
on its own (no multitasking; Supplementary Information section 5.2). d, Scaling 
number of programs on the client. For N ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, we initiate simultaneously: 
(1) N LGT programs (each using k = 100) on the client; (2) N DQC-client programs 
on the client (each k = 60); and (3) N DQC-server programs on the server (each 
k = 60). This results in 2N programs simultaneously active on the client, each 
continuously submitting subroutines from the CNPU to the QNPU. Each 
experiment was repeated but with multitasking disabled. The plot shows the 
utilization factor of the QDevice (fraction of time spent executing instructions), 
corrected for variable entanglement generation duration (Methods), with (blue) 
and without (orange) multitasking, showing that multitasking can increase 
device utilization. Error bars are standard deviation.

has only one qubit, the multitasking of DQC and LGT never results in 
both programs having a quantum state alive on the client; therefore, 
multitasking should not affect the fidelity of LGT. We observe inter-
leaved execution of DQC quantum blocks and LGT quantum blocks 
on the client node (Fig. 5b). The LGT application produces a quantum 
result (fidelity; Fig. 5c) equal to that in the scenario in which we run LGT 
on its own (not interleaved by DQC circuit executions), as expected.

We further test multitasking by scaling up the number of programs 
executed concurrently on the client node, up to five DQC and five 
LGT programs running at the same time on the client. The interleaved 
execution of subroutines of different programs increases device utiliza-
tion (fraction of time spent on executing physical instructions) on the 

client QDevice compared with the same scenario but with multitask-
ing disabled (Fig. 5d). As expected, we observe that LGT subroutines 
were scheduled to be executed between DQC subroutines, resulting 
in lower client QDevice idle time. When multitasking one DQC and one 
LGT program, we observe one or two subroutines between DQC itera-
tions in most cases (LGT subroutine duration approximately 2.4 ms; 
Supplementary Information section 5.3). We observe cases in which 
both server and client QDevice remain idle, which could be improved 
in part by smarter CNPU-QNPU scheduling algorithms: (1) both the 
client and the server wait until the start of the next network schedule 
time bin (time bin length 10 ms); (2) the client QNPU finishes a sub-
routine for user process P but must wait until the CNPU sends the next 

326  |  Nature  |  Vol 639  |  13 March 2025

ArticleServerLGTiteration jClientDQCiteration iDQCiteration i + 1LGTiteration j + 2LGTiteration j + 1Qubit createdQubit measuredDQC iteration iDQC iteration i + 1...Attempts...AttemptsRD()ClientqubitInitSubroutine L1Repeat for B ∈ {±X, ±Y, ±Z}Babcd+X–X+Y–Y+Z–ZTarget state0.900.920.940.960.981.00Fidelity246810Number of applications (client)00.10.20.30.40.5QDevice utilization factorMultitaskingNo multitaskingsubroutine for P (up to 150 ms for one DQC and one LGT program, but 
less (up to only 8 ms) when more applications are running, as there are 
more CNPU processes independently submitting subroutines); (3) the 
client is ready to perform entanglement generation for DQC, but the 
next time bin starts only at some future time t, preventing activation of 
the network process. The scheduler activates a user process that runs 
a LGT circuit, which completes at some time >t, delaying the start of 
the DQC network process, even though the server node was ready at t.

Outlook
We designed and implemented the first architecture allowing high-level 
programming and execution of quantum network applications. Our 
architecture does not depend on the distance or connectivity between 
the end nodes, as long as the network stack enables the use of a quantum 
network to generate entanglement between them. To deploy our system 
onto nodes separated by several kilometres, one possible improvement 
to the implementation of our architecture would be to realize the CNPU 
and the QNPU on two devices on a single system board, ideally with 
mutual access to a shared memory to avoid millisecond delays in their 
communication. Such a merger would also allow the definition of a joint 
classical-quantum executable and processes, opening further doors to 
reduce latencies by a better scheduling control. Our architecture could 
also be used to distribute a quantum computing program over several 
quantum processors by submitting jobs as NetQASM subroutines to 
the QNPU of each node.

Our work provides a framework for a new domain of computer sci-
ence research into programming quantum network applications on 
quantum processors, including new, real-time69 scheduling algorithms 
for classical-quantum processes, compile methods for quantum net-
work applications59 or new programming language concepts includ-
ing entanglement to make software development even easier, thus 
advancing the vision to make quantum network technology broadly 
available.

Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summa-
ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl-
edgements, peer review information; details of author contributions 
and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability 
are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-08704-w.

Kimble, H. J. The quantum internet. Nature 453, 1023–1030 (2008).

1. 
2.  Wehner, S., Elkouss, D. & Hanson, R. Quantum internet: a vision for the road ahead. 

Science 362, eaam9288 (2018).
van Meter, R. Quantum Networking (Wiley, 2014).

3. 
4.  Barz, S. et al. Demonstration of blind quantum computing. Science 335, 303–308 (2012).
5.  Drmota, P. et al. Verifiable blind quantum computing with trapped ions and single 

photons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 132, 150604 (2024).

17.  Moehring, D. L. et al. Entanglement of single-atom quantum bits at a distance. Nature 

449, 68–71 (2007).

18.  Ritter, S. et al. An elementary quantum network of single atoms in optical cavities. Nature 

484, 195–200 (2012).

19.  Hofmann, J. et al. Heralded entanglement between widely separated atoms. Science 337, 

72–75 (2012).

20.  Stockill, R. et al. Phase-tuned entangled state generation between distant spin qubits. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 010503 (2017).

21.  Stephenson, L. J. et al. High-rate, high-fidelity entanglement of qubits across an elementary 

quantum network. Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 110501 (2020).

22.  Pompili, M. et al. Realization of a multinode quantum network of remote solid-state qubits. 

Science 372, 259–264 (2021).

23.  Krutyanskiy, V. et al. Entanglement of trapped-ion qubits separated by 230 meters. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 130, 050803 (2023).

24.  van Leent, T. et al. Entangling single atoms over 33 km telecom fibre. Nature 607, 69–73 

(2022).

25.  Stolk, A. J. et al. Metropolitan-scale heralded entanglement of solid-state qubits. Sci. Adv. 

10, eadp6442 (2024).

26.  Knaut, C. M. et al. Entanglement of nanophotonic quantum memory nodes in a telecom 

network. Nature 629, 573–578 (2024).

27.  Ben-Or, M. & Hassidim, A. Fast Quantum Byzantine Agreement. Proc. Thirty-seventh Annual 

ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC ’05) 481–485 (ACM, 2005).

28.  Poremba, A. Quantum proofs of deletion for learning with errors. Preprint at https://arxiv.

org/abs/2203.01610 (2022).

29.  Guérin, P. A., Feix, A., Araújo, M. & Brukner, Č. Exponential communication complexity 
advantage from quantum superposition of the direction of communication. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 117, 100502 (2016).

30.  Childs, A. M. Secure assisted quantum computation. Quantum Inf. Comput. 5, 456–466 

(2005).

31.  Liu, W.-Z. et al. Toward a photonic demonstration of device-independent quantum key 

distribution. Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, 050502 (2022).

32.  Zhang, W. et al. A device-independent quantum key distribution system for distant users. 

Nature 607, 687–691 (2022).

33.  Jing, B. et al. Entanglement of three quantum memories via interference of three single 

photons. Nat. Photon. 13, 210–213 (2019).

34.  Dahlberg, A. et al. A Link Layer Protocol for Quantum Networks. Proc. ACM Special Interest 

Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’19) 159–173 (ACM, 2019).

35.  Kozlowski, W., Dahlberg, A. & Wehner, S. Designing a quantum network protocol. in Proc. 

16th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies 
(CoNEXT ’20) 1–16 (ACM, 2020).

36.  Aliro Security, Advanced Secure Networking. https://www.aliroquantum.com (2024).
37.  Pirker, A. & Dü, W. A quantum network stack and protocols for reliable entanglement- 

based networks. New J. Phys. 21, 033003 (2019).

38.  Pompili, M. et al. Experimental demonstration of entanglement delivery using a quantum 

network stack. npj Quantum Inf. 8, 121 (2022).

39.  Monga, I., Saglamyurek, E., Kissel, E., Haffner, H. & Wu, W. in Proc. 1st Workshop on 

Quantum Networks and Distributed Quantum Computing (QuNet ’23) 31–37 (ACM, 2023).
40.  Castells, M. in Ch@nge: 19 Key Essays on How the Internet Is Changing Our Lives 127–148 

(BBVA, 2013).

41.  Quantum Software Development Kits in 2024. AIMultiple: High Tech Use Cases & Tools to 

Grow Your Business. https://research.aimultiple.com/quantum-sdk/ (2024).

42.  Ma, Y., Kashefi, E., Arapinis, M., Chakraborty, K. & Kaplan, M. QEnclave - a practical solution 

for secure quantum cloud computing. npj Quantum Inf. 8, 128 (2022).

43.  Lidar, D. A. & Brun, T. A. Quantum Error Correction (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2013).
44.  Botelho, L. et al. Error mitigation for variational quantum algorithms through mid-circuit 

measurements. Phys. Rev. A 105, 022441 (2022).

45.  Bharti, K. et al. Noisy intermediate-scale quantum algorithms. Rev. Mod. Phys. 94, 015004 

(2022).

46.  Bertels, K. et al. Quantum computer architecture toward full-stack quantum accelerators. 

IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 1, 1–17 (2020).

47.  Fu, X. et al. eQASM: An Executable Quantum Instruction Set Architecture. Proc. 2019 IEEE 

International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) 224–237 
(IEEE, 2019).

48.  Giortamis, E., Romão, F., Tornow, N. & Bhatotia, P. QOS: a quantum operating system. 

6.  Nadlinger, D. Device-independent Key Distribution Between Trapped-ion Quantum 

Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.19120 (2024).

Network Nodes. Thesis, Univ. Oxford (2022).

49.  Kong, W. et al. Origin Pilot: a quantum operating system for effecient usage of quantum 

7.  Hermans, S. L. N. et al. Qubit teleportation between non-neighbouring nodes in a 

resources. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.10730 (2021).

8. 

quantum network. Nature 605, 663–668 (2022).
Iuliano, M. et al. Qubit teleportation between a memory-compatible photonic time-bin 
qubit and a solid-state quantum network node. npj Quantum Inf. 10, 107 (2024).
9.  Matsukevich, D., Maunz, P., Hayes, D., Duan, L.-M. & Monroe, C. Quantum teleportation 

between distant matter qubits. Science 323, 486–489 (2009).

50.  Humphreys, P. C. et al. Deterministic delivery of remote entanglement on a quantum 

network. Nature 558, 268–273 (2018).

51.  Skrzypczyk, M. & Wehner, S. An architecture for meeting quality-of-service requirements 
in multi-user quantum networks. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.13124 (2021).
52.  Drmota, P. et al. Robust quantum memory in a trapped-ion quantum network node. Phys. 

10.  Langenfeld, S. et al. Quantum teleportation between remote qubit memories with only a 

Rev. Lett. 130, 090803 (2023).

single photon as a resource. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 130502 (2021).

53.  Krutyanskiy, V. et al. Light-matter entanglement over 50 km of optical fibre. npj Quantum 

11.  Pfaff, W. et al. Unconditional quantum teleportation between distant solid-state quantum 

Inf. 5, 72 (2019).

bits. Science 345, 532–535 (2014).

54.  Vardoyan, G., Skrzypczyk, M. & Wehner, S. On the quantum performance evaluation of 

12.  Chou, K. S. et al. Deterministic teleportation of a quantum gate between two logical 

two distributed quantum architectures. Perform. Eval. 153, 102242 (2022).

qubits. Nature 561, 368–373 (2018).

13.  Broadbent, A., Fitzsimons, J. & Kashefi, E. Universal Blind Quantum Computation. Proc. 

2009 50th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science 517–526  
(IEEE, 2009).

55.  McCullough, J. D., Speierman, K. H. & Zurcher, F. W. in Proc. November 30–December 1, 
1965, Fall Joint Computer Conference, Part I (AFIPS ‘65 (Fall, part I)) 611–617 (ACM, 1965).

56.  Dennis, J. B. Segmentation and the design of multiprogrammed computer systems. J. ACM 

12, 589–602 (1965).

14.  Doherty, M. W. et al. The nitrogen-vacancy colour centre in diamond. Phys. Rep. 528, 1–45 

57.  Dennis, J. B. & Van Horn, E. C. Programming semantics for multiprogrammed computations. 

(2013).

Commun. ACM 9, 143–155 (1966).

15.  Childress, L. & Hanson, R. Diamond NV centers for quantum computing and quantum 

58.  Tanenbaum, A. S. & Woodhull, A. S. Operating Systems Design and Implementation 3rd 

networks. MRS Bull. 38, 134–138 (2013).

edn (Prentice-Hall, 2005).

16.  Fioretto, D. Towards a Flexible Source for Indistinguishable Photons Based on Trapped 

Ions and Cavities. PhD thesis, Univ. Innsbruck (2020).

59.  Dahlberg, A. et al. NetQASM—a low-level instruction set architecture for hybrid quantum–
classical programs in a quantum internet. Quantum Sci. Technol. 7, 035023 (2022).

Nature  |  Vol 639  |  13 March 2025  |  327

60.  Teller, M. et al. Integrating a fiber cavity into a wheel trap for strong ion–cavity coupling. 

70.  Caleffi, M. et al. Distributed quantum computing: a survey. Comput. Netw. 254, 110672 

AVS Quantum Sci. 5, 012001 (2023).

(2024).

61.  Teller, M. et al. Heating of a trapped ion induced by dielectric materials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

126, 230505 (2021).

62.  Zurich Instruments. HDAWG, 750 MHz Arbitrary Waveform Generator. Zurich Instruments 
https://www.zhinst.com/europe/en/products/hdawg-arbitrary-waveform-generator 
(2019).

63.  Liu, C. L. & Layland, J. W. Scheduling algorithms for multiprogramming in a hard-real-time 

environment. J. ACM 20, 46–61 (1973).

64.  Daley, R. C. & Dennis, J. B. Virtual memory, processes, and sharing in Multics. Commun. 

ACM 11, 306–312 (1968).

65.  Peterson, J. L. & Silberschatz, A. Operating System Concepts 2nd edn (Addison-Wesley, 

1985).

66.  Chesson, G. L. The network UNIX system. ACM SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 9, 60–66 (1975).
67.  Leach, P. et al. The architecture of an integrated local network. IEEE J. Sel. Areas 

Commun. 1, 842–857 (1983).

68.  Massar, S. & Popescu, S. Optimal extraction of information from finite quantum 

ensembles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 1259 (1995).

69.  Ramamritham, K. & Stankovic, J. A. Scheduling algorithms and operating systems 

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any 
non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide 
a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material.  
You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this 
article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the 
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is  
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain 
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

support for real-time systems. Proc. IEEE 82, 55–67 (1994).

© The Author(s) 2025

328  |  Nature  |  Vol 639  |  13 March 2025

ArticleMethods

QDevice model
The QDevice includes a physical quantum device that can initialize 
and store quantum bits (qubits)—which are individually identified by 
a physical address—apply quantum gates, measure qubits and create 
entanglement with QDevices on other nodes (either entangle-and-
measure or entangle-and-keep34), either another end node or an inter-
mediary node in the network. We remark that the ability for two end 
node QDevices that are not immediate neighbours in the quantum 
network (but that are separated by other network nodes) to generate 
entanglement between them relies on the architecture implementing 
a network layer protocol as part of a network stack34. Qubits thereby 
refers to any possible realization of qubits, including logical qubits real-
ized by error correction. The QDevice exposes the following interface to 
QNodeOS (Supplementary Information section 2.6): number of qubits 
available and the supported physical instructions that QNodeOS may 
send. Physical instructions include qubit initialization, single-qubit and 
two-qubit gates, measurement, entanglement creation and a ‘none’ for 
do nothing. Each instruction has a corresponding response (including 
entanglement success or failure or a measurement outcome) that the 
QDevice sends back to QNodeOS.

QNodeOS and the QDevice interact by passing messages back and 
forth on clock ticks at a fixed rate (100 kHz in our NV implementation, 
50 kHz in the trapped-ion implementation). During each tick, at the 
same time: (1) QNodeOS sends a physical instruction to the QDevice 
and (2) the QDevice can send a response (for a previous instruction). 
On receiving an instruction, the QDevice performs the appropriate 
(sequence of) operations (for example, a particular pulse sequence 
in the AWG). An instruction may take several ticks to complete, for 
which the QDevice returns the response (success, fail, outcome) dur-
ing the first clock tick following completion. The QDevice handles an 
entanglement instruction by performing (a batch of) entanglement 
generation attempts38 (synchronized by the QDevice with the QDevice 
of the neighbouring node).

QNodeOS architecture
QNodeOS consists of two layers: the CNPU and the QNPU (Fig. 2a; main 
text and Supplementary Information). Processes on the QNPU are 
managed by the process manager and executed by the local processor. 
Executing a user process means executing NetQASM59 subroutines 
(quantum blocks) of that process, which involves running classical 
instructions (including flow control logic) on the local processor of 
the QNPU, sending entanglement requests to the network stack and 
handling local quantum operations by sending physical instructions 
to the QDriver (Fig. 2a). Executing the network process means asking 
the network stack which request (if any) to handle and sending the 
appropriate (entanglement generation) instructions to the QDevice.
A QNPU process can be in the following states (see Supplementary 
Fig. 5 for state diagram): idle, ready, running and waiting. A QNPU pro-
cess is running when the QNPU processor is assigned to it. The network 
process becomes ready when a network schedule time bin starts; it 
becomes waiting when it finishes executing and waits for the next time 
bin; it is never idle. A user process is ready when there is at least one 
NetQASM subroutine pending to be executed; it is idle otherwise; it goes 
into the waiting state when it requests entanglement from the network 
stack (using NetQASM entanglement instructions59) and is made ready 
again when the requested entangled qubit(s) is(are) delivered.

The QNPU scheduler oversees all processes (user and network) on 
the QNPU and chooses which ready process is assigned to the QNPU 
processor. CNPU processes can run concurrently and their execution 
(order) is handled by the CNPU scheduler. The QNPU scheduler oper-
ates independently and only acts on QNPU processes. CNPU processes 
can only communicate with their corresponding QNPU processes. 
Because several programs can run concurrently on QNodeOS, the QNPU 

may have numerous user processes that have subroutines waiting to be 
executed at the same time. Hence this requires scheduling on the QNPU.
Processes allocate qubits through the QMMU, which manages virtual 
qubit address spaces for each process and translates virtual addresses 
to physical addresses in the QDevice. The QMMU can also transfer 
ownership of qubits between processes, for example, from the network 
process (having just created an entangled qubit) to a user process that 
requested this entanglement.

The network stack uses entanglement request sockets (opened by 
user programs through the QNPU API once execution starts) to repre-
sent quantum connections with programs on other nodes. The entan-
glement management unit maintains all entanglement request sockets 
and makes sure that entangled qubits are moved to the correct process.

NV QDevice implementation
The two-node network used in this work includes the nodes ‘Bob’ (server) 
and ‘Charlie’ (client) (separated by 3 m) described in refs. 7,22,38.  
For the QDevice, we replicated the setup used in ref. 38, which mainly 
consists of: an ADwin-Pro II (ref. 71) acting as the main orchestrator 
of the setup; a series of subordinate devices responsible for qubit 
control, including laser pulse generators, optical readout circuits 
and an AWG (Zurich Instruments HDAWG62). The quantum physical 
device, based on NV centres, counts one qubit for each node. The two 
QDevices share a common 1-MHz clock for high-level communication 
and their AWGs are synchronized at the sub-nanosecond level for 
entanglement attempts.

We address the challenge of limited memory lifetimes by using 
DD. While waiting for further physical instructions to be issued, DD 
sequences are used to preserve the coherence of the electron spin 
qubit72. DD sequences for NV centres can prolong the coherence time 
(Tcoh) up to hundreds of milliseconds (ref. 7) or even seconds73. In our 
specific case, we measured Tcoh = 13(2) ms for the server node, cor-
responding to about 1,300 DD pulses. The discrepancy to the state of 
the art for similar setups is because of several factors. To achieve such 
long Tcoh, a thorough investigation of the nuclear spin environment is 
necessary to avoid unwanted interactions during long DD sequences, 
resulting in an even more accurate choice of interpulse delay. Other 
noise sources include unwanted laser fields, the quality of microwave 
pulses and electrical noise along the microwave line.

A specific challenge arises at the intersection of extending memory 
lifetimes using DD and the need for interactivity: to realize individual 
physical instructions, many waveforms are uploaded to the AWG, in 
which the QDevice decodes instructions sent by QNodeOS into specific 
preloaded pulse sequences. This results in a waveform table containing 
170 entries. The efficiency of the waveforms is limited by the waveform 
granularity of the AWG that corresponds to steps that are multiples of 
6.66 ns, having a direct impact on the Tcoh. We are able to partially over-
come this limitation by using the methods described in ref. 74. Namely, 
each preloaded waveform, corresponding to one single instruction, has 
to be uploaded 16 times to be executed with sample precision. To not 
fill up the waveform memory of the device, we apply the methods in 
ref. 74 only to the DD pulses that are played while the QDevice waits for 
an instruction from the QNPU, whereas the instructed waveforms (gate/
operation + first block of the XY8 DD sequence) are padded according 
to the granularity, if necessary.

The list of physical instructions supported by our NV QDevice is 

given in Supplementary Information section 3.1.

NV QNPU implementation
The QNPUs for both nodes are implemented in C++ on top of Free-
RTOS75, a real-time operating system for microcontrollers. The stack 
runs on a dedicated MicroZed76, an off-the-shelf platform based on 
the Zynq 7000 SoC, which hosts two ARM Cortex-A9 processing 
cores, of which only one is used, clocked at 667 MHz. The QNPU was 
implemented on top of FreeRTOS to avoid reimplementing standard 

operating system primitives such as threads and network communica-
tion. FreeRTOS provides basic operating system abstractions such as 
tasks, intertask message-passing and the TCP/IP stack. The FreeRTOS 
kernel—like any other standard operating system—cannot however 
directly manage the quantum resources (qubits, entanglement requests 
and entangled pairs) and hence its task scheduler cannot take decisions 
based on such resources. The QNPU scheduler adds these capabilities 
(Supplementary Information section 2.5).

The QNPU connects to peer QNPU devices by means of TCP/IP over a 
Gigabit Ethernet interface (IEEE 802.3 over full-duplex Cat 5e). The com-
munication goes through two network switches (Netgear JGS524PE, 
one per node). The two QNPUs are time-synchronized through their 
respective QDevices (granularity 10 μs), as these already are synchro-
nized at the microsecond level (common 1-Mhz clock).

The QNPU device interfaces with the QDevice’s ADwin-Pro II through 
a 12.5-MHz serial peripheral interface (SPI) interface, used to exchange 
4-byte control messages at a rate of 100 kHz.

NV CNPU implementation
The CNPUs for both nodes are a Python runtime executing on a 
general-purpose desktop machine (four Intel 3.20-GHz cores, 32 GB 
RAM, Ubuntu 18.04). The choice of using a high-level system was made 
as the communication between distant nodes would ultimately be in 
the millisecond timescale and this allows for ease of programming the 
application. The CNPU machine connects to the QNPU device through 
TCP over a Gigabit Ethernet interface (IEEE 802.3 over full-duplex Cat 8,  
average ping round-trip time of 0.1 ms), through the same single net-
work switch as mentioned above (one per node), and sends application 
registration requests and NetQASM subroutines over this interface (10 
to 1,000 bytes, depending on the length of the subroutine). CNPUs 
communicate with each other through the same two network switches.

Scheduler implementations
We use a single Linux process (Python) for executing programs on 
the CNPU. CNPU ‘processes’ are realized as threads created within 
this single Python process. Python was chosen because the NetQASM 
SDK is implemented in Python. When running several programs con-
currently, a pool of such threads is used. Scheduling of the Python 
process and its threads is handled by the Linux operating system. Each 
thread establishes a TCP connection with the QNPU to use the QNPU 
API (including sending subroutines and receiving their results) and 
executes the classical blocks for its corresponding program.

Both the CNPU and the QNPU maintain processes for running pro-
grams. The CNPU scheduler (standard Linux scheduler, see above) 
schedules CNPU processes, which indirectly controls in which order 
subroutines from different programs arrive at the QNPU. The QNPU 
scheduler handles subroutines of the same process priority on a 
first-come-first-served basis, leading however to executions of QNPU 
processes not in the order submitted by the CNPU (Supplementary 
Information section 5.3).

Using only the CNPU scheduler is not sufficient because: (1) we 
want to avoid millisecond delays needed to communicate scheduling 
instructions across the CNPU and the QNPU; (2) user processes need 
to be scheduled in conjunction with the network process (meeting the 
challenge of scheduling both local and network operations), which is 
only running on the QNPU; and (3) QNPU user processes need to be 
scheduled with respect to each other (for example, a user process is 
waiting after having requested entanglement, allowing another user 
process to be run, as observed in the multitasking demonstration).

Sockets and the network schedule
In an entanglement request socket, one node is a ‘creator’ and the 
other is a ‘receiver’. As long as an entanglement request socket is open 
between the nodes, an entanglement request from only the creator suf-
fices for the network stack to handle it in the next corresponding time 

bin, that is, the ‘receiver’ can comply with entanglement generation 
even if no request has (yet) been made to its network stack.

Trapped-ion implementation
The experimental system used for the trapped-ion implementation is 
discussed in refs. 60,61 and is described in detail in ref. 77. The imple-
mentation itself is described in ref. 16. We confine a single 40Ca+ ion in a 
linear Paul trap; the trap is based on a 300-μm-thick diamond wafer on 
which gold electrodes have been sputtered. The ion trap is integrated 
with an optical microcavity composed of two fibre-based mirrors, but 
the microcavity is not used here. The physical-layer control infrastruc-
ture consists of C++ software, Python scripts, a pulse sequencer that 
translates Python commands to a hardware description language for 
a field-programmable gate array (FPGA) and hardware that includes 
the FPGA, input triggers, direct digital synthesis (DDS) modules and 
output logic.

QNodeOS provides physical instructions through a development 
FPGA board (Texas Instruments, LAUNCHXL2-RM57L (ref. 78)) that uses 
a SPI. We programmed another board (Cypress, CY8CKIT-143 (ref. 79))  
that translates SPI messages into TTL signals compatible with the input 
triggers of our experimental hardware.

The implementation consisted of sequences composed of seven 
physical instructions: initialization, RX(π), RY(π), RX(π/2), RY(π/2), 
RY(−π/2) and measurement. First, we confirmed that message exchange 
occurred at the rate of 50 kHz as designed. Next, we confirmed that we 
could trigger the physical-layer hardware. Finally, we implemented 
seven different sequences. Each sequence was repeated 104 times, 
which allowed us to acquire sufficient statistics to confirm that our 
QDriver results are consistent with operation in the absence of the 
higher layers of QNodeOS.

Metrics
Both classical and quantum metrics are relevant in the performance 
evaluation: the quantum performance of our test programs is measured 
by the fidelity F(ρ, |τ⟩) of an experimentally obtained quantum state ρ 
to a target state |τ⟩, in which F(ρ, |τ⟩) = ⟨τ|ρ|τ⟩, estimated by quantum 
tomography80. Classical performance metrics include device utiliza-
tion Tutil = 1 − Tidle/Ttotal, in which Tidle is the total time that the QDevice is 
not executing any physical instruction and Ttotal is the duration of the 
whole experiment, excluding time spent on entanglement attempts 
(see below).

Experiment procedure NV demonstration
Applications are written in Python using the NetQASM SDK59 (code in 
Supplementary Information), with a compiler targeting the NV flavour59, 
as it includes quantum instructions that can be easily mapped to the 
physical instructions supported by the NV QDevice. The client and server 
nodes independently start execution of their programs by invoking a 
Python script on their own CNPU, which then spawns the threads for 
each program. During application execution, the CNPUs have back-
ground processes running, including QDevice monitoring software.

A fixed network schedule is installed in the two QNPUs with consecu-
tive time bins (all assigned to the client–server node pair) with a length 
of 10 ms (chosen to be equal to 1,000 communication cycles between 
QNodeOS and QDevice as in ref. 38) to assess the performance without 
introducing a dependence on a changing network schedule. During 
execution, the CNPUs and QNPUs record events including their time 
stamps. After execution, corrections are applied to the results (see 
below) and event traces are used to compute latencies.

DQC
Our demonstration of DQC (Fig. 4) implements the effective single- 
qubit computation  ψ H R α
 on the server, as a simple form 
( ) |+⟩
∘
of blind quantum computing that hides the rotation angle α from the 
server when executed with randomly chosen θ and not performing 

⟩ =

∘

Z

∣

Articletomography. The remote entanglement protocol used is the single- 
photon protocol81–83 (Supplementary Information section 3.1).

Filtering
Results, with no post-selection, are presented including known errors 
that occur during the tomography single-shot readout (SSRO) process 
(Fig. 4b, blue) (details on the correction in the Supplementary Informa-
tion of ref. 22). We also report the post-selected results in which data are 
filtered on the basis of the outcome of the charge-resonance check84 
after one application iteration (Fig. 4b, purple). This filter enables the 
elimination of false events, specifically when the emitter of one of the 
two nodes is not in the right charge state (ionization) or the optical 
resonances are not correctly addressed by the laser fields after the 
execution of one iteration of DQC.

Further filtering (Fig. 4b, latency filtered) is performed on those 
iterations that showed latency not compatible with the combination 
of Tcoh of the server and the average entangled state fidelity. For this 
filter, a simulation (using a depolarizing model, based on the meas-
ured value Tcoh; Supplementary Information section 4.4) was used to 
estimate the single-qubit fidelity (given the entanglement fidelity 
measured above) as a function of the duration the server qubit stays 
live in memory in a single execution of the DQC circuit (Fig. 4a). This 
gives a conservative upper bound of the duration as 8.95 ms, to obtain 
a fidelity of at least 0.667. All measurement results corresponding to 
circuit executions exceeding 8.95 ms duration were discarded (146 out 
of 7,200 data points).

Other main sources of infidelity not considered in this analysis of 
the outcome include, for instance, the non-zero probability of double 
excitation for the NV centre83. During entanglement generation, the NV 
centre can be re-excited, leading to the emission of two photons that 
lower the heralded entanglement fidelity. The error can be corrected 
by discarding those events that registered, in the entanglement time 
window, a photon at the heralding station (resonant zero-phonon line 
photon) and another one locally at the node (off-resonant phonon 
sideband photon).

Finally, the dataset presented in Fig. 4b (not shown chronologically) 
was taken in ‘one shot’ to prove the robustness of the physical layer, 
therefore no calibration of relevant experimental parameters was 
performed in between, leading to possible degradation of the overall 
performance of the NV-based setup.

The single-qubit fidelity is calculated with the same methods as in 
ref. 8, measuring in the state |i⟩ and in its orthogonal state |−i⟩, provided 
that we expect the outcome |i⟩, whereas the two-qubit state fidelity is 
computed taking into account only the same positive-basis correla-
tors (XX, YY, ZZ).

Multitasking: delegated computation and LGT
In the first multitasking evaluation, we concurrently execute two 
programs on the client: a DQC-client program (interacting with a 
DQC-server program on the server) and a LGT program (on the client 
only) (Fig. 5). The client CNPU runtime executes the threads, execut-
ing the two different programs concurrently. The client QNPU has two 
active user processes, each continuously receiving new subroutines 
from the CNPU, which are scheduled with respect to each other and 
the network process.

Estimates of the fidelity (Fig. 5b) include the same corrections as 
in the Supplementary Information of ref. 22. To assess the quantum 
performance of the LGT application, we used a mocked entanglement 
generation process on the QDevices (executing entanglement actions 
without entanglement) to simplify the test: weak-coherent pulses on 
resonance with the NV transitions, which follow the usual optical path, 
are used to trigger the complex programmable logic device in the entan-
glement heralding time window. This results in comparable application 
behaviour for DQC (comparable rates and latencies; Supplementary 
Information section 5.1) with respect to multitasking on QNodeOS.

Multitasking: QDevice utilization when scaling number of 
programs
We scale the number of programs being multitasked (Fig. 5d). We 
observe how the client QNPU scheduler chooses the execution order of 
the subroutines submitted by the CNPU. DQC subroutines each have an 
entanglement instruction, causing the corresponding user process to 
go into the waiting state when executed (waiting for entanglement from 
the network process). The QNPU scheduler schedules another process 
((56%, 81%, 99%) for (N = 1, N = 2, N > 2)) of the times that a DQC process 
is put into the waiting state (demonstrating that the QNPU schedules 
independently from the order in which the CNPU submits subroutines). 
The number of consecutive LGT subroutines (of any LGT process; LGT 
block execution time approximately 2.4 ms) that is executed between 
DQC subroutines is 0.83 for N = 1, increasing for each higher N until 1.65 
for N = 5, showing that indeed idle times during DQC are partially filled 
by LGT blocks (Supplementary Information section 5.3).

Device utilization (see ‘Metrics’ section) quantifies only the utiliza-
tion factor between entanglement generation time windows to fairly 
compare the multitasking and non-multitasking scenarios. In both 
scenarios, the same entanglement generation processes are performed, 
which—hence—have the same probabilistic durations in both cases. To 
avoid inaccurate results owing to this probabilistic nature, we exclude 
the entanglement generation time windows in both cases.

Data availability
The datasets that support this manuscript and the software to ana-
lyse them are available at https://doi.org/10.4121/6aa42f05-6823-
4848-b235-3ea19e39f4ae.

Code availability
The application software development kit used for writing program 
code is open-sourced on GitHub85. The QNodeOS source code is 
not open source at present, but site visits are possible for academic 
researchers.

71.  ADwin-Pro II – flexible and modular. https://www.adwin.de/us/produkte/proII.html (2024).
72.  De Lange, G., Wang, Z., Riste, D., Dobrovitski, V. & Hanson, R. Universal dynamical 

decoupling of a single solid-state spin from a spin bath. Science 330, 60–63 (2010).
73.  Abobeih, M. H. et al. One-second coherence for a single electron spin coupled to a 

multi-qubit nuclear-spin environment. Nat. Commun. 9, 2552 (2018).

74.  Corna, A. Efficient generation of dynamic pulses. Zurich Instruments https://www.zhinst.

com/europe/en/blogs/efficient-generation-dynamic-pulses (2021).

75.  FreeRTOS. Real-time operating system for microcontrollers and small microprocessors. 

FreeRTOS https://www.freertos.org/ (2024).

76.  MicroZed. Development board based on the Zynq-7000 SoC. Avnet https://www.avnet.
com/wps/portal/us/products/avnet-boards/avnet-board-families/microzed/ (2024).
77.  Teller, M. Measuring and Modeling Electric-field Noise in an Ion-cavity System. PhD thesis, 

Univ. Innsbruck (2021).

78.  LAUNCHXL2-RM57L. Hercules RM57Lx LaunchPad Development Kit. Texas Instruments 

https://www.ti.com/tool/LAUNCHXL2-RM57L (2024).

79.  CY8CKIT-143A. Infineon Technologies https://www.infineon.com/cms/en/product/

evaluation-boards/cy8ckit-143a/ (2024).

80.  Paris, M. & Rehacek, J. Quantum State Estimation Vol. 649 (Springer, 2004).
81.  Cabrillo, C., Cirac, J. I., García-Fernández, P. & Zoller, P. Creation of entangled states of 

distant atoms by interference. Phys. Rev. A 59, 1025–1033 (1999).

82.  Bose, S., Knight, P. L., Plenio, M. B. & Vedral, V. Proposal for teleportation of an atomic 

state via cavity decay. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5158–5161 (1999).

83.  Hermans, S. L. N. et al. Entangling remote qubits using the single-photon protocol: an 

in-depth theoretical and experimental study. New J. Phys. 25, 013011 (2023).

84.  Robledo, L., Bernien, H., van Weperen, I. & Hanson, R. Control and coherence of the 

optical transition of single nitrogen vacancy centers in diamond. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 
177403 (2010).

85.  NetQASM. GitHub https://github.com/QuTech-Delft/netqasm (2024).

Acknowledgements This research was supported by the Quantum Internet Alliance through 
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 programme under grant agreement no. 820445 and from 
the Horizon Europe programme grant agreement no. 101080128. S.W. acknowledges support 
from a Dutch Research Council (NWO) Vici grant. M.I., A.R.-P.M. and R.H. also acknowledge 
support from the NWO through the Spinoza Prize 2019 (no. SPI 63-264). This project has also 
received financing from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s 

 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement no. 852410). H.B.v.O. 
acknowledges support from the joint research program “Modular quantum computers” by 
Fujitsu Limited and Delft University of Technology, co-funded by the Netherlands Enterprise 
Agency under project number PPS2007.

the main text, with input from all authors; C.D.D., M.I., B.v.d.V., W.K., P.P., T.E.N. and S.W. wrote 
the Supplementary Material; T.H.T., P.P., T.E.N., R.H. and S.W. supervised the research; S.W. 
supervised the collaboration.

Author contributions S.W. conceived the project; A.D., M.S. and S.W. developed the initial 
ideas; C.D.D., B.v.d.V., W.K., M.S., I.t.R., P.P. and S.W. designed the QNodeOS architecture; 
C.D.D., B.v.d.V., W.K., I.t.R., G.M.F., T.J.W.v.d.S., H.J., M.S. and P.P. implemented the operating 
system; M.I. prepared the nitrogen-vacancy setup, with help from A.R.-P.M., J.F., H.B.v.O. and 
N.D.; C.D.D., M.I., B.v.d.V., W.K., I.t.R., T.E.N., R.H. and S.W. devised the experiments; M.I. and 
B.v.d.V. performed the nitrogen-vacancy experiments, analysed the data and discussed the 
results with all of the authors.; D.F., M.T. and P.F. prepared the trapped-ion setup; C.D.D.,  
D.F. and M.T. performed the trapped-ion integration tests; B.v.d.V. analysed the delegated 
computation protocol, with the help of D.L., L.M. and H.O.; M.I., B.v.d.V., T.E.N. and S.W. wrote 

Competing interests C.D.D., B.v.d.V., A.D., M.S., I.t.R., W.K. and S.W. have filed a patent on the 
QNodeOS architecture.

Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-08704-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S. Wehner.
Peer review information Nature thanks Claudio Cicconetti and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) 
for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.

Article